

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

       REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE                                                             Form Approved OMB NO. 0704-0188

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions,
searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.  Send comments
regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggesstions for reducing this burden, to Washington
Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington VA, 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any oenalty for failing to comply with a collection
of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number.
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.
1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY)                          2. REPORT TYPE                                     3. DATES COVERED (From - To)
11-07-2023                                                                                                               15-Nov-2019   14-May-2023Final Report-
4.  TITLE AND SUBTITLE                                                                    5a.  CONTRACT NUMBER
Final Report: ACT-NOW: Autonomous Cognitive Technologies                                  W911NF-20-2-0006
for Novelty in Open Worlds                                                                5b.  GRANT NUMBER


                                                                                          5c.  PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER

 6. AUTHORS                                                                               5d.  PROJECT NUMBER

                                                                                          5e.  TASK NUMBER


                                                                                          5f.  WORK UNIT NUMBER


 7.  PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAMES AND ADDRESSES                                                    8.  PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT
  Tufts University                                                                                  NUMBER
  Research Administration
  20 Professors Row
  Medford, MA                                          02155 -5807
 9.  SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS                                              10.  SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S)
 (ES)                                                                                                  ARO
 U.S. Army Research Office                                                                        11.  SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT
  P.O. Box 12211                                                                                  NUMBER(S)
  Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-2211                                                           76263-MI-DRP.1

12. DISTRIBUTION AVAILIBILITY STATEMENT
Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
13.  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
The views, opinions and/or findings contained in this report are those of the author(s) and should not contrued as an official Department
of the Army position, policy or decision, unless so designated by other documentation.

14.  ABSTRACT








 15.  SUBJECT TERMS



16.  SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF:                       17.  LIMITATION OF            15.  NUMBER       19a.  NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON
a. REPORT      b. ABSTRACT        c. THIS PAGE         ABSTRACT                      OF PAGES          Matthias Scheutz
UU               UU                  UU                 UU                                             19b.  TELEPHONE NUMBER
                                                                                                        617-627-0453
                                                                                                                    Standard Form 298 (Rev 8/98)
                                                                                                                    Prescribed by ANSI  Std. Z39.18

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

                                                     RPPR Final Report
                                                       as of 14-Jul-2023

Agency Code:  21XD

Proposal Number:  76263MIDRP                                       Agreement Number:  W911NF-20-2-0006
INVESTIGATOR(S):

     Name:  Chitta  Baral
     Email:  chitta.baral@asu.edu
     Phone Number:  4807276047
     Principal:

     Name:  Jivko  Sinapov
     Email:  Jivko.Sinapov@tufts.edu
     Phone Number:  6176272225
     Principal:

     Name:  Liping  Liu
     Email:  Liping.Liu@tufts.edu
     Phone Number:  6176270556
     Principal:

     Name:  Matthias  Scheutz
     Email:  Matthias.Scheutz@tufts.edu
     Phone Number:  6176270453
     Principal:  Y

     Name:  Michael C. Hughes
     Email:  Michael.Hughes@tufts.edu
     Phone Number:  6176272229
     Principal:

     Name:  Subbarao  Kambhampati
     Email:  RAO@ASU.EDU
     Phone Number:  4809650113
     Principal:

Organization:  Tufts University
Address:  Research Administration, Medford, MA  021555807
Country:  USA
DUNS Number:  073134835                                            EIN: 042103634
Report Date:  14-Aug-2023                                          Date Received:  11-Jul-2023
Final Report for Period Beginning 15-Nov-2019 and Ending 14-May-2023
Title:  ACT-NOW: Autonomous Cognitive Technologies for Novelty in Open Worlds
Begin Performance Period: 15-Nov-2019                              End Performance Period:  30-Jun-2023
Report Term:  0-Other
Submitted By:  Matthias Scheutz                                    Email:  Matthias.Scheutz@tufts.edu
                                                                   Phone:  (617) 627-0453
Distribution Statement:  1-Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.

STEM Degrees:                                STEM Participants:

Major Goals:  The main objective of the project was to develop a versatile novelty-aware cognitive robotic
architecture that will enable artificial agents to cope with "unknown unknowns".  Specifically, we aimed to develop
inference-based and learning-based methods for novelty detection, combining statistically trained subsymbolic
models with knowledge-based symbolic models and utilizing a mixture of symbolic and statistical inference for
detecting deviations from expectations. We used three TA1 tasks to develop these algorithms: Polycraft, Monopoly,
and NLP (the last was removed in the final phase of the project).  Another main goal was to also characterize the
detected novelties and determine how to cope with them based on the effects they had on the agent's task. We
also planned to integrate all algorithms for novelty detection, characterization, and accommodation into the unified

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

                                                      RPPR Final Report
                                                        as of 14-Jul-2023

architecture framework to be able to utilize them in future work in different domains.

Accomplishments:  Our team had the highest performing agent in the Polycraft and NLP domains, and the
second highest in the Monopoly domain.  Our accomplishments include:

1. Foundational work on novelty concepts
2. Architectural developments for novelty handling
3. Visual novelty detection
4. Agent novelty detection and accommodation
5. Inference-based novelty detection
6. Hybrid planning reinforcement learning for novelty accommodation
7. Multi-player novelty detection and accommodation

The details are described in the attached report.

Training Opportunities:  The project allowed for the training of sizeable number of graduate students over the
course of the 42 months (24 to varying degrees of involvement).

Results Dissemination:  Throughout the project, we disseminated our research results in top national and
international venues (a detailed publication list is included in the report).


Honors and Awards:  Nothing to Report

Protocol Activity Status:

Technology Transfer:  The integrated novelty-aware and novelty-handling cognitive robotic architecture has been
transitioned to Thinking Robots Inc.

PARTICIPANTS:

Participant Type:  PD/PI
Participant:  Matthias  Scheutz
Person Months Worked:  4.00                                         Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Co PD/PI
Participant:  Jivko  Sinapov
Person Months Worked:  2.00                                         Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Co PD/PI
Participant:  Michael  Hughes
Person Months Worked:  2.00                                         Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Co PD/PI
Participant:  Liping  Liu
Person Months Worked:  2.00                                         Funding Support:
Project Contribution:

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

                                                    RPPR Final Report
                                                      as of 14-Jul-2023

National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Co PD/PI
Participant:  Chitta  Baral
Person Months Worked:  2.00                                      Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Co PD/PI
Participant:  Subbarao  Kampambathi
Person Months Worked:  2.00                                      Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Vasanth  Sarathy
Person Months Worked:  8.00                                      Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Shivam  Goel
Person Months Worked:  12.00                                     Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Yash  Shukla
Person Months Worked:  6.00                                      Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Gyan  Tatiya
Person Months Worked:  6.00                                      Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Technician
Participant:  Evan  Krause
Person Months Worked:  12.00                                     Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====

                                                    RPPR Final Report
                                                      as of 14-Jul-2023



Participant Type:  Technician
Participant:  Ravenna  Thielstorm
Person Months Worked:  12.00                                     Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Technician
Participant:  Marlow  Fawn
Person Months Worked:  6.00                                      Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Technician
Participant:  Eric  Wyss
Person Months Worked:  3.00                                      Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Staff Scientist (doctoral level)
Participant:  Michael  Jahn
Person Months Worked:  2.00                                      Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Ming  Shen
Person Months Worked:  12.00                                     Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Mayank  Garg
Person Months Worked:  4.00                                      Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Tung  Thai
Person Months Worked:  12.00                                     Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====

                                                    RPPR Final Report
                                                      as of 14-Jul-2023

Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Neeraj  Kalani
Person Months Worked:  12.00                                     Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Utkarsh  Soni
Person Months Worked:  12.00                                     Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Mudit  Verma
Person Months Worked:  12.00                                     Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Sriram  Gopalakrishnan
Person Months Worked:  12.00                                     Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N



Participant Type:  Graduate Student (research assistant)
Participant:  Sarath  Sreedharan
Person Months Worked:  6.00                                      Funding Support:
Project Contribution:
National Academy Member: N

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====

                                                           RPPR Final Report
                                                             as of 14-Jul-2023

       Partners

       ,







I certify that the information in the report is complete and accurate:
Signature:  Matthias Scheutz
Signature Date: 7/11/23   5:21AM

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====

                     SAIL-ON        Final   Report
                         ACT-NOW:
Autonomous      Cognitive   Technologies    for Novelty   in Open   Worlds

         Matthias Scheutz, Michael Hughes, LipingLiu,Jivko Sinapov
                               TuftsUniversity

                  Chitta Baraland Subbarao  Kambhampati
                          Arizona State University

                                July11,2023

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====

                                           Abstract

The  goal of the  project was   to develop   novelty-aware,    novelty-handling    agents  that
would  be  able  todeal  with  a great  variety of novelties  in as much    of a task- and
domain-independent      fashion   as possible.   For  thispurpose,   we   started with  our
cognitive  robotic DIARC    architecture   as a framework    for all algorithm  development     and
code  integration  in the three  TA1  domains:    Polycraft, Monopoly,    and  NLP   (the last
domain   was  eventually   abandoned     when   the TA1   team  dropped    out).
       The   main  scientific innovations   include  a formal  framework    for analyzing   the
concept  of novelty  and   itsdifferent forms;  the  combination    of knowledge-based      models
with statisticallearning   models   for detecting  deviations   from  predicted  outcomes:
novelty  detection  via model   prediction  error; the  development    of novel  problem    solving
strategies  forhow   to handle   model   prediction  errors (e.g., prediction  failures of action
outcomes)    and  model   repairs; the  synergistic  combination    of high-level  planning  with
low-level reinforcement    learning  to quickly  learn  how  to accommodate       novelties
(“RapidLearn”);   a modification   to the MCTS     algorithms   used  for determining   best
responses   after novelty  introduction   with accommodated       novelties  in large  state-action
spaces   inmulti-player   stochastic  environments;    and   finallynovel  neural  network   models
forvision  and  agent  behavior   models   to determine    deviations  from  learned   behaviors,
and  novel  methods    fornovelty  detection   and  accommodation      in NLP   domains.
       We   achieved   top  performance    in Polycraft  and  NLP,  and   second   best
performance    in Monopoly,    either meeting   or coming   very  close  to allexpected
benchmarks,    and  exceeding    them   in several  measures.     We  were   able to demonstrate
the operation   of the integrated  architecture   in additional  domains   including   the CARLA
driving simulation   as well as  a physical  assembly    task  using  the Fetch   robot.
Throughout    the project  we  disseminate    our research   in top national  and  international
venues   and  we  stillhave  several  project-related   papers   under  review  or in preparation.
The  integrated  architecture   has  already  been   transitioned  to Thinking   Robots   Inc. which
isalready   using  itinits social robot  product.   We   already  have  made    several  datasets
and  tools like the NovelGridWorlds      simulation  available  through   github  and  plan  to
release  the improved    integrated  DIARC    architecture   at a later point this year  as well.

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====

Objectives

The  ACT-NOW      project was   a joint effortof the  Tufts and  ASU   teams   who   collaborated
on all aspects  of the  research   and  developments     of the main  project  objective:  to
develop   an  integrated   architecture    for novelty-aware      and  novelty-handling
agents.

We  utilized the initiallyselected   three TA1   domains:   Polycraft  (an action-perception
domain),  Monopoly     (an action  domain),   and  NLP   (a perception   domain)   for all
algorithms  and  technology    developments     in the four project  years  as  follows:

Year  1: The  goal  was  to start with the  DIARC    cognitive  robotic architecture   shown
below  as  an architectural  framework    for allagent   developments     (except  for the NLP
domain   which  did  not find the architectural  template),   and  initiallydevelop  the  first
novelty  detection  and  accommodation      methods    in Polycraft  for object novelties.

Year  2: The  goal  was  to add  the  Monopoly    and  later NLP  domains    and  develop
additional novelty   methods   for detecting  relations,  agents,  actions,  and  interaction
novelties. In particular, the  goal was   to combine   knowledge-based       with statistical
methods,   including  learned   statisticalmodels   for both  perception   and  action.

Year  3: The  goal  was  to develop   additional  methods    for detecting,  characterizing,  and
accommodating      the remaining   novelties  (goal,  environment,    and  events),  including  a
comprehensive     task-general   method    foraddressing    different types  of expectations
failures that are caused    by novelties.

Year  4: The  goal  was  to improve   the  performance    of our agents   and  to characterize   the
novelties  inas  much   detail as  possible  symbolically   to allow for human    understandable
natural language    descriptions   ofthe  characterization.

For all algorithm  and  code   development    the  guiding  aim  was  to be  as task-general    as
possible  even  though   we  used   specific tasks  and  environments    during   the project.  We
also aimed   to demonstrate    the  integrated  architecture  on  other  domains   at the  end  of
the project, including  simulated   and  physical   robotics  domains.

We  accomplished     allobjectives   and  exceeded    them  in several  areas.

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====

                     Summary             of   Accomplishments

The  main  project  outcome    includes  several  scientific accomplishments,      technical
breakthroughs,    as well  as technical  transitions  and  software   and  dataset  contributions.
       The   scientific accomplishments      include  a formal  framework    for analyzing   the
concept  of novelty  and   itsdifferent forms;  the  combination    of top-down
knowledge-based      models   with  bottom-up   statistical models   for detecting  deviations   from
predicted  outcomes:    novelty  detection  via  model  prediction   error and  deviation  from
known   entities, properties,  etc.; the extension   of a cognitive  natural  language-enabled
robotic DIARC    architecture   to handle  all types  ofnovelties   instochastic   multi-agent
environments;    the development     of novel  problem   solving  strategies  for how   to handle
model  prediction   errors (e.g., prediction  failures of action  outcomes)    and  model   repairs;
the synergistic  combination    of high-level  planning   with low-level  reinforcement    learning
toquickly  learn  how  to accommodate       novelties  (“RapidLearn”);   a  modification  to the
MCTS    algorithms   used  for determining   best  responses    after novelty  introduction  with
accommodated      novelties  in large  state-action  spaces;   novel  neural  network   models   for
vision and  agent  behavior   models   to determine    deviations  from  learned   behaviors,   and
novel  methods   for novelty  detection   and  accommodation      in NLP   domains.
       Technical   breakthroughs     includes  significant  speedup   in life-long open-world
learning  using  sequences    of novelties  where   state-of-the-art  reinforcement    learning
algorithms  or life-long learning   algorithms  cannot   even   solve the  firstnovelty;  integration
ofSAIL-ON     algorithms   and  methods    into the cognitive  robotic  DIARC    architecture  which
makes   them   immediately   applicable   to real-world  autonomous     systems;    the
demonstration    of the performance     of the integrated   architecture  in the Polycraft  and
Monopoly    domains   (which   was  among    the highest   inboth  domains);   and   an additional
demonstration    of the architecture   in simulated   environments    (e.g., a shopping   task  in a
Supermarket    OpenAI    Gym   simulation   and  driving  on country   roads  in the Carla
simulator),  and  on robots  (e.g., action  discovery   and  learning  on  a Baxter  robot  and
task-based   human-robot     interaction  on a  Fetch  robot).
       The   technical  transitions  include  the integrated  architecture   which  was
transitioned  to the startup  company    Thinking   Robots   Inc. as  well as the  software   which
willbe  used  on  deployed   service  robots  to improve   robustness    to unexpected    changes
during  task performance.
       Finally, software   and  dataset  contributions   include  the  release  of various  data
sets (e.g., the NovelCraft   dataset   published   in Transaction   on  Machine   Learning
Research)    and  open-source     software  packages    published   on  github  (e.g., the
Novelgridworlds    OpenAI    Gym   for novelty  detection,  characterization,   and
accommodation      work,  or datasets   for“GAN   ensemble    for anomaly    detection”;  additional
releases,  in particular of the  integrated  DIARC    architecture  with  allSAIL-ON     integrations
are currently  in progress,  expected    for Fall 2023).

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====

Detailed         Accomplishments

We  started  with the DIARC    cognitive  robotic  architecture  shown    below  as  an
architectural framework    for allagent   developments,    except   for the NLP   domain   which
did not find the architectural  template,   and  developed    various  algorithms  and
components    for the  architecture  to detect, characterize,   and  accommodate      novelties.
























The  red components     in the above   diagram   represent   components     that were  either
extended   and  augmented     by new   algorithms   (e.g.,the  Vision Processing    component,    or
the Goal  and  Skill Manager),   or develop   from  scratch  (e.g., the novelty  exploration
component    or the  MCTS    component    for multi-player  novelty  accommodation).       Among
the TA1  evaluation   domains,   Polycraft  was  unique   in that itpresented   a combined
domain   in which  to do perceptual   novelty  detection   as part of performing   an
action-oriented  task.  Our  novelty  detection  paradigm    was  built on the  idea that both
top-down   knowledge-based      inferences   as well  as a bottom-up    learned  statistical models
are needed   to detect  the various   types  ofnovelty  categories   selected   as part of the
program,   the former  to detect  state differences   from  rule-based   expectations   while  the
latterdetects  distributional  differences.  Novelty  characterization   builds  on novelty
detection  to determine   the type  of novelty  based   on what   was  detected   and  how  (e.g., a
distributional shiftof a set  of known   actions  isdifferent  from encountering    an  unknown
action). Note  that novelty  characterization   might  require  exploration   to determine   the
properties  of the novelty.  Finally,novelty  accommodation      uses   novelty  characterization
toaugment    the  agent's  knowledge    base  and  to update   machine   learning   models.
       In the  following, we  will detail the various  research   and  development     efforts
performed   by  the team  in seven   sections:

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====

   1.  Foundational    work   on novelty  concepts
   2.  Architectural   developments     for novelty  handling
   3.  Visual  novelty  detection
   4.  Agent   novelty  detection   and  accommodation
   5.  Inference-based     novelty  detection
   6.  Hybrid   planning  reinforcement    learning  for novelty  accommodation
   7.  Multi-player   novelty  detection  and  accommodation
   8.  Evaluations
   9.  Publications

Inaddition,  we  put  together  a comprehensive      video  for the DARPA     Open   House/Family
Day  that showcased     not only  our agents   detecting  and   handling  novelties  in the
Polycraft/Minecraft   environment,    but also  additional  demonstrations     of novelty  detection
inthe  simulated   CARLA    driving  domain   as  well as the  detection  of expectation
violations and  automatic   recovery   in a robotic  assembly    task on  a physica   robot.

===== PDF PAGE 14 =====

1.  Foundational               work       on    novelty        concepts

Performing   tasks  in open   worlds  requires  an  agent   to be ready   forthe  unknown,    for by
definition what  makes    a world  open   isthat  not all ontological  types  or entities (widely
construed   to include  objects,  actions,  events,  goals,  rules, etc. and   theirproperties,
properties  of properties,  etc.) are  known   in advance    to the agent.  For  example,    an agent
might  be confronted    with an  unknown    change    in the environment    which   is task-relevant
ifnot necessary    for completing   the  task and   the agent  must   cope  with  it.Coping   might
take different  forms,  from  ignoring  it(either due   tothe  failure of detecting  itor  because
the agent  does   not know   what   to do with  it),toaccommodating       itby  working  “with”  or
“around”  it(e.g., finding  alternative  plans,  treating itas  ifitwere   something    known   that
the agent  knows    how  to handle,   or something    that won’t  happen    again  etc.),to
attempting   to characterize   itand,  based   on  the characterization,   accommodate       it(e.g.,
through  learning  more   about   the entity and  how   itaffects  the agent’s  task  performance,
utilizingits properties  for better task  performance,     understanding    the  counterfactual
effects for future situations,  etc.). The  extent  to which   an agent   isready   for open  worlds,
i.e.,can  accomplish    itsgoals  in an  open  world  setting  (given  a set of initialstates),  we
willcall “open-world   readiness”    and  issomething    we   want  to quantify.  In the course   of
doing  so, we  need   to distinguish  different agent   abilitiesto detect,  characterize,   and
accommodate      novelties  in the open   world.  Some    agents  might   be able  to accommodate
novelties  by learning,  others  simply   by selecting  different  existing  behaviors,   itall
depends   on  their goals  and  tasks.
       Open-world     learning  is also not  required  for novelty  detection,   characterization,
and  accommodation.      An  agent  might   detect  a novelty,  characterize   itrelative to its goals
and  decide  that it can  be ignored   and  does   not need   to be remembered,      which  is a form
ofaccommodation       that does   not require  learning  (the  agent  might  go  through   the same
reasoning   over  and  over  again  ifitrepeatedly    encounters   the  same   type  of novelty).
Open-world    learning  thus  is orthogonal   to novel  detection,  characterization,    and
accommodation      and  can  occur  irrespective   of novelty-awareness      (e.g., through  simple
reinforcement,   Hebbian    learning,  etc.). We  do,  however,   claim  that open-world    learning
based  on  novelty  detection,   characterization,   and  accommodation       can  be beneficial  to
agents  ifdone   right (itcan  also be  detrimental   to the agent’s   goals  ifitends   up chasing
down   novelties  and  trying to characterize   them,   even  though   they  have   no relevance    for
itstasks). For  example,    while  novelty  detection  and  characterization    might  produce
overhead   initially(compared     toother  ways   of coping   with novelties),  itmight  provide
longer-term   benefits  and  thus  putting  inthe  effort to characterize   novelties  that seem
task-relevant  and   to store the  characterization   might  pay   offlater when   that knowledge
can  lead to better  accommodation      (e.g., discovering   and   remembering     how   a
screwdriver   can  be  used  to open   a can  of paint could   be helpful  for using  a pry bar).  We
startby  analyzing   the concept   of novelty:  what   itisand   what  itis not; what  different

===== PDF PAGE 15 =====

types  there are;  how  it can  be detected,   characterized,    and  accommodated;       and  how  it
could  be evaluated    in artificialagents.

1.1  Concepts        of  Novelty

Novelty  can  arise  in many   different ways,   from  novel  objects  with  novel  properties,  to
novel  relations and   contexts,  to novel  actions  and   events,  to novel  goals  and  tasks,  to
novel  constraints  and   rules, and  so  forth,even   in closed  worlds.  For  example,    suppose
a closed-world   agent   encounters    an  unforeseen    fault during  task performance     (such  as
data corruptions,   sensor   failure, insufficient compute    power,   etc.) which  causes   a
change   in itsperformance.     The  agent   then may   or may   not  be able  to detect  the
change,   and  even   when   itdetects  the  change,   itmight  not  be able  to characterize   the
faultand   find a way  to address    it.Similarly, in open  worlds,  agents   ought   to handle
novelty  when   itpresents   opportunities   for improving   performance,     especially  when   it
enables   goal accomplishment      (which   would   not have   been  possible   without  utilizing the
novelty). We   thus  need   a definition of “novelty”  that can  distinguish   novelty  from  other
related phenomena      (such   as surprising  non-novel    states  of affairs).
        Novelty  is not a  property  of entities. Entities  inthe  world  do  not have   labels that
say “novel”  on  them.  Rather,   novelty  is always   relative to an  agent’s  cognitive  system
and  past  experiences,   which   is essential  for how  we   approach    novelty  in the design   of
our algorithms   and  agent   architectures.   Novelty  thus  is an intrinsically relational
concept:  something    is “novel”  with  respect  to some   reference   frame   describing   or
reference   system   instantiating  entities (e.g., a set of images    that does  not  contain  the
image   of a particular object  or type  of object);  itis a relation between    an  agent  and  an
environment;    more   precisely, a  relation between    the agent’s   belief state and   a
representation   the  agent  cannot   accommodate       with itspast  memories     or inferences
from  those  memories.
        The  reference   system   is typically realized  in an  epistemic   agent,  i.e.,as  the
agent’s  internal representations,    stored  or  inferred, of certain  entity instances   and  types:
something    is“novel”  for the  agent  ifthe agent   does  not  have  an  internal  representation
ofit and  cannot   generate   a representation    for it(e.g., by way   of making   inferences,   or
through  other  types  of internal  processes    generating   combinations     of representations).
I.e.,when   an  agent  has  previously   encountered    an  entity, being  able  to recall the
encounter   makes    a subsequent     encounter   not  novel.  However,   if the agent  does   not
remember    encountering     the entity previously   and  can  also  not identify  the entity or its
type through   inference,   the encountered     entity willbe  novel  for the agent   (and  itwill
continue  to be  novel  for as  long as  the agent   does  not  form  memories    or  acquire  the
requisite knowledge     about  the  entity,regardless    of whether   an  external  observer
watching   the agent’s   repeated   encounters    with the  entity expects   the
agents  to know   the  entity after the firstencounter).

===== PDF PAGE 16 =====

        For agents   that do  not  form  (long-term)   memories,    every  encounter    will be novel
whether   the agent   is aware   of itor not, while  for others  (that remember     every   past
experience   and   can  make   inference   based   on  those  memories,    say)  nothing   willbe
novel  because    they can   already  represent   all possible  encounters    (e.g., an
obstacle-avoiding    robot  that for each   obstacle   configuration   in itsperceptual   occupancy
grid has  a policy  for how  to avoid  it).For  many   entities  itdoes  not  even  make    sense   to
ask whether    something    is novel  for them  (e.g., a  lamp),  since  they  do not  have
perceptions   or internal  processes    that generate    representations    of entities, while  for
others  itmight  not  be interesting   to ask  that question   because    encountering    novelty
does  not  cause   any  changes    inthe  agent’s  behavior   (e.g., the  agent  might   remember
the novel  encounter,    but without  using  it to adapt  its internal processes).    Yet other
agents  are  able  to detect  novelty  and  adjust  their internal  processes    based   on  it(e.g.,
as many   machine    learning   algorithms   do  automatically   without  explicitly noticing
novelty).
        Since  novelty  is in the mind   of the beholder,   i.e.,agents   observing    or
contemplating    an  entity, action, process,   etc., we  need   to keep   inmind   whose   novelty
we  are evaluating   when    we  design  artificialagents   that can   detect, characterize,    and
accommodate      novelty:  the  agent’s  or ours?   Typical  machine    learning  tasks  require  our
agents  to detect  what   we  – the  agent  designers    and  evaluators   – consider   “novel  in the
data”, i.e.,novel  items   inevaluation   data  relative  to a set of given   items  in training data
that does  not  contain  these   items.  Our  reasoning   is that any  agent   familiar with  the
training set ought   to be  able  to determine   that the  evaluation   data  contains   novel  items.
Whether   this is actually  so, however,    willdepend    on  a variety  of factors, not  the least  the
agent’s  discrimination   capabilities.
        We  introduce   the  concept   of “original” vs. “derived”   novelty  to elucidate  an
important  distinction  regarding   the  agent’s  cognitive   capabilities: for some    agents,
entities they  have  not  per se  experienced    will not be  novel  as  these  agents   can
construct  patterns   representing   or  denoting   such  entities (e.g., by  combining    patterns
resulting from   other previously   experienced     entities), while  others  not capable    of such
(hypothetical)  constructions    will always   find unexperienced     entities novel.  We   will thus
count  an  item as  only  novel  for an  agent  when   the  agent  has  not  experienced    the  item
before  (i.e.,cannot   recall it)and  cannot   actually  derive  itfrom  its knowledge    base,   which
leaves  us  with four  cases:

    ●   the agent   has  experienced    itbefore   and  remembered      it,hence   itis not novel
    ●   the agent   derived  itwithout   having  experienced     it,so ifand  when    itexperiences
        it,itwillnot  be novel  (note  that  this does  not  exclude   the possibility  that the
        experience    of the novelty  will have  other  aspects   the  agent  did  not foresee   that
        would  be  novel)

===== PDF PAGE 17 =====

    ●   the agent   could  in principle derive  itbased    on its knowledge    and   derivation
        processes    ifitdid itfor long  enough    (but practically  not derivable),   hence
        practically the  item  isnovel
    ●   the agent   could  not derive  itgiven   itscognitive  capabilities,  hence   itis novel

When   we  intend   to evaluate  whether    an  agent  detected   novelties  and   accommodate
them  in a task,  itis possible  and  in some    cases  will be  extremely   likely,that the  agent
detected   novelties  that we  were   not aware    ofor  novelties  that we  did  not consider   novel
because   we   did not understand     what  the  agent  did and   did not know.   What   can  appear
tobe  accidentally   novel  or not  novel  at allto us,  might  be  genuinely   novel  to an  agent
which  raises  the  question  of what   itmeans    to evaluate   an agent-relative   concept    like
novelty.
        “Novelty”  is different from  other  related  concepts    that are  often conflated   with
novelty:

    ●   “Surprise”:  isbased    on forming   expectations    about  states,  entities, properties,
        etc. based   on past  experience;    being  surprised   by  the outcome    is one  way   for an
        agent  to detect  novelty  which   ought   tobe  maximally    surprising  (as  itwillhave
        had  zero  probability  based   on  the agent’s  internalized   distribution); however,
        novelty  may   or may   not be  surprising  to an  agent
    ●   “Outlier” or “distributional  change”:   whether   a  distributional change    really involves
        a novelty  will depend   on  whether   the  range  of the  distribution  isnovel   (e.g.,“we
        didn’t know   we  could  have   negative   values”),  whether   the  shape   of the
        distribution is novel  (e.g., “we  didn’t know   we   could  have  zig-zag   probability
        density  functions”),  or whether   there  are  novel  elements    in the distribution  (which
        isdifferent  from  the above   ”negative   values”   case  where   we  know   what   those
        values  are, just not  that the  particular distribution  could  range   over  them,  and
        different from  the  shape   of the distribution  above   where   we  also  knew   the values
        but just not how   they  could  be  distributed).  So  even  in the  novel  distribution  case
        the novelty  does   not lie in the change    of the distribution  per  se (because    I can
        learn about   a change    of the distribution  in a biased   die by  observing   itlong
        enough;   but  even  without  learning   that particular  change   I know   that there  can  be
        biases  and  what   possible  distributional  shapes    they can   take for die  rolls,so
        while I might  not  expect  the  different distribution  with  that particular  die, Iam   not
        caught  by  surprise  that  itcould  exhibit the  one  itdoes   precisely  because    of my
        knowledge    about   die rolls and  biased   dice). Rather,  a  distributional novelty   would
        have  to be  an  unknown    mathematical     form  which   the agent   has  not experienced
        before  and  could  not  have  derived   from  its knowledge.
    ●   “Anomaly”:   is the mismatch     between    an expectation/prediction     (based   on  a law,  a
        regularity, a distribution,  etc.) and  an  observation   that  does  not  match   the
        expectation/prediction;    the  difference  between    “noise”  and  “anomaly”    then  is that

===== PDF PAGE 18 =====

        anomalies    are systematic,    repeatable,   and  thus  indicative  of lack of knowledge     in
        the law, regularity,  or distribution  used  to predict  future  behavior   whereas    noise
        may  indicate  a  one-off  outcome;    anomalies    may   or may   not be  novel  depending
        on what   the anomalous     outcome    is and  how   itrelates  to the underlying    law,
        regularity, distribution,  etc.;note  that  an agent   witnessing   an  anomaly    once  might
        encounter   novelty   (e.g., a novel  state) but  when   the  anomaly    occurs  again   itisno
        longer  novel,  while  stillbeing  an anomaly;    critically,ifthe  agent  does   not update
        itsmodel   for making   predictions   under   which   the specific  outcome    was
        anomalous,    itwill continue   to be  anomalous,    even   though   itwillnot  be  novel.
    ●   Novelty  and   similarity: a red apple   that differs slightly in terms  of color  from
        another  red  apple  is stillan  apple,  and  stilla red apple,   because    itissimilar
        enough   (based   on  some   notion   of similarity);hence,   an  agent   that has  seen  the
        firstred apple   willnot  have  seen   a novel  property   instantiated   inthe  second
        apple  ,even   though   the  second   apple’s  redness    differs slightly from  the firstone
        unless  one  includes   “trivialnovelty”  which   counts   any  quantitative  deviation   in
        redness   as  different (note  that itwill have  a  seen  a novel   apple  instance   though,
        but different  instances   of the same    type are  usually  not  a concern)

Overall,  it’sessential  to distinguish  the  concept   of novelty  from   the process   of how
novelty  can  be  detected   by an  agent   (e.g.,whether    and  how   “surprise”,  “anomaly”,   and
“similarity” can  be used   to detect  novelty).

1.2  Novelty      detection       and    characterization
While  the concept    of “novelty”  isdifferent  from  those  of “surprise”,  “anomaly”,
“prediction”, “distributional  outlier”, “expectation   failure”, and  other  related  concepts,
many   of the related  concepts    (some   which   implicitly refer to architectural  mechanisms)
can  be used   to detect  novelty.
        Forming   expectations    based   on  past  experience    and  being  surprised   by  the
outcome,   for example,    is one  way  for an  agent   to detect  novelty  which   ought  to be
maximally   surprising   (as itwill have  had   zero  probability  based   on the  agent’s
internalized  distribution). However,    surprise   does  not  entail detecting   novelty:  surprise
requires  the formation   of expectations,    but  just noticing  that an  expected   outcome    did
not happen    isnot  sufficient for detecting   novelty  (e.g., ifthe  agent  cannot   characterize
or classify the  actual  outcome,    ifitonly knows    that itdoes   not know   it,or ifitcannot
determine   what   about  the  outcome    isdifferent,  itcould  only  hypothesize    that something
novel  might  have   happened).    For  example,    ifan agent   cannot   distinguish  between    two
types  of objects  A  and  B given   a set of objects  but  notices  that other  agents   seem    to
have  consistently   clear  preferences    when   they  deal with  these  objects   (e.g.,in terms   of
value  of the object),  itmight  infer that there  must   be  something    about  the  objects  itis
not perceiving   or cannot   discriminate   (e.g., think  of the subtle  difference   inpatterns

===== PDF PAGE 19 =====

between    poisonous    and  edible  mushrooms).     Even   without   forming   expectations,
something    to be  judged  as  being  out-of-distribution   can  indicate  novelty   (although   ifthe
distribution is continuous,    then  itis unclear  whether    out-of-distribution  item  is truly not in
the distribution  or the  distribution is not  represented    well enough    to include   the item).
        Being  told about   something    new   or being   ina  situation  where   something    novel  is
expected   is another   way   to learn about   novelty  (this does   not require  surprise,   but itstill
requires  the  abilityto compare     to stored  memories).    Generating    an  internal  combination
of symbols   in a way   that has  not  happened     before  and  that  ismeaningful    w.r.t. to types
of entities is another   way  to discover   novelty  without   surprise.   While  some    methods
such  as  forming  expectations    based    on past  distributional  knowledge     is a good   way  for
detecting  pattern-based     novelties,  other  types  of novelties   such  as  semantic   or
conceptual   novelties   cannot   be  simply  found   based   on pattern-based     similarities.  There
isalso  the case   of meta-novelties,    i.e.,novelties   arising due   to presence    or absence    of
novelties  at some   object  level  (e.g., the expectation    to see  new   pictures  at an  exhibit
when   only old  known   ones   are  displayed).
        Based   on  the novelty   hierarchy,  we  have   some   qualitative  measures     of difficulty
of different types  of novelty,  e.g., relational  novelty  involves   entities in which   the relation
isgrounded,    hence   recognizing    relational  novelty  at the  very  least requires   the
recognition   of the involved   entities (I cannot  determine    the  relation between    two  entities
ifIcannot   recognize    them  as  entities; I might  be  able  to determine   the  relation  without
being  able  to determine    the types  of the  entities, but at  the very  least I need   to be able
to see  them  as  entities that  can  be  related  to each  other).  For  example,   consider
“symmetry”    and  “asymmetry”     as  properties  of relations:  Itseems    that an  agent   could  not
discover/detect    the properties   of “symmetry    or asymmetry”     of a  relation without   being
able to detect   the particular  relation  (e.g., “next to” or “taller than”),  which,  in turn, would
require  itto detect  entities that  could  be  inthe  “next  to” or “tallerthan”  relations.   Note
that there  isa  complex    interplay  based   on the  agent’s  employed     ontology   and  formalism
forrepresenting    itthat  willpotentially  trade  off different ontological   categories.
        When   novelty   is detected,  an  agent   might  opt  to characterize   it,i.e.,determine
what  itis in order  to be  able to utilize itand   possibly  better  accommodate       it(now  or in
the future).  However,    what   ontological  types   are detected   or  are relevant   for an agent
willessentially  depend    on  the  agent’s  goals,  and  hence   the  question   arises  what  we
mean   by  novelty  characterization    when   itis again  a  agent-relative   and  not  absolute
notion, one   that depends    on  the agent’s   ontology,  representational     formalism,   goals,
and  possibly  other  aspects.    For  example,   consider   the  tree in Polycraft   that only  yields
one  log (instead   of two). From   the  agent  pursuing    the Pogostick    goal it might  be
characterized    as a “poor”  tree  because    itonly  yields one   log, whereas    from  the  clean-up
lumberjack   agent’s   perspective   it might  be  characterized    as a  “light”tree  because    only
one  log needs   to be  cleaned   up.  Or  itcould  be  considered    a different  kind of object,  a
shrub,  say, which   looks  identical  to a tree. In either  case,  the  new  object  must   have   a

===== PDF PAGE 20 =====

property,  potentially  unobservable     to the  agent,  that distinguishes    itfrom  trees  according
to Leibniz’  principle of the  identity of indiscernibles:    “x isidentical  to y ifffor every
property  F, object  x has  F  ifand  only  ifobject  y has  F”  (for otherwise   itwould   be  the
same   object).  Note  that as  a result  of either internal  difference   (i.e.,novelty
characterization    relative to the  agent’s  goals)  or  external  differences   (i.e.,novelty
characterization    to difference  in hypothesized     types)  we  get  two  conceptually    different
novelty  accounts.   Moreover,    ifthe  tree yielding  only  one  treelog   isperceptually
indistinguishable   from   other  trees yields  itcould   be interpreted   as  either “tree  novelty”  –
inthis case   the tree  has  a hidden,   unobservable     property   that makes    is only  produce
one  log – or  an “chop   action  novelty”.  I.e.,the  above   can  also  be  construed    as a
different action  outcome    of the  “chop”  action  (e.g., and   thus  as the  “chop”  affordance    of
the tree): what   distinguishes   two  perceptually    indiscernible   trees is that one   yields one
tree log as  action  outcome    of “chop”   while  the other  yields  two  (the two  trees  are
identical in all other  aspects).  Conversely,    the  “chop”  action  could   be  viewed   as
non-deterministic    on  the same    tree, sometimes     yielding  one,  other  times  yielding  two
tree logs  (e.g., depending    on  how   hard  the  tree is chopped;    maybe    the agent   does  not
have  enough    control  of how   itchops   trees  and  small  deviations   in low-level  behavior,
possibly  unobservable     to the  agent,  have   an  effect on  the outcome).    The   action
outcome    then  also  points  to the construal   of differences   in “events”:  “one   treelog
appearance”     event  vs. the  “two  treelog  appearance”     event.    Similarly,  the chop   action
can  be viewed    as an  interaction  with  the  tree rather  than  applying   an  action  to an  object,
hence   “interactions”,  too, can  be  traded   offwith  object  affordances,    events,  object
properties,  etc.  Even   objects  themselves     could  be  viewed   as  “action  outcomes”    of
“look” actions  in context   (ifIlook  over  there  from  here   Isee  a  tree, i.e.,the  tree appears
because    Ilooked   there  from  here).  Hence,   the  look  action  can  have   different
non-deterministic    outcomes.
        Allof  this points  to the difficulty of assessing    and  evaluating   novelty
characterizations    because    even   within the  same   ontological   and  representational
frameworks    the  same   novelty   might  receive   different characterizations     by different
agents.  Since   novelty  characterization    depend    on  the agent’s   tasks  and  goals,  the
agent’s  ontology,   and  the agent’s   representational    repertoire,  it is,like novelty  itself,as
an agent-relative    notion  not directly  measurable,    unless   a particular  representational
format  is explicitly imposed    on  the agent   and  the  agent  has  an  explicit goal  (as  part of
itstask)  to generate   novelty   characterizations    in the specified   format.  This  is important
because    external  evaluations    of novelty  characterizations    without   requiring  a shared
vocabulary   would   have   otherwise   to resort  to behavioral    measures    and   those  will likely
have  to measure     “novelty  accommodation”       and  thus  conflate  “novelty   characterization”
with “novelty  accommodation”.       Ifcharacterization    accuracy,    or more   generally,  success
isto be  evaluated,   it isthus  critical to make   itmade    part of the  agent’s  task  and  to
require  the agent   (again  as  part of the  task)  to produce   the  proper  representational

===== PDF PAGE 21 =====

description  in the prescribed    ontology,  as  otherwise   there  isno  incentive  for the  agent  to
characterize   novelty,  letalone  in the  format  used   forevaluation   (for an  agent  might  well
be able  to detect  novelties  and  accommodate       them,  even   in cases   where   proper
accommodation      is necessary    for task accomplishment,      but without   ever  characterizing
novelties,  or characterizing   them   in any  way  understandable     for human    observers).   Also
note that  novelty  characterization   may   or may   not  involve  learning  (e.g., the agent   may
be able  to describe   what  is novel  about  a  novel  item  without  storing  that description  and
using  itfor itsoperation).
        We  need   to distinguish  “novelty  accommodation”       from  “novelty  characterization”
inthat  accommodation,      in the simplest   case,  does  not  require  “characterization”,   just to
deal with  novelty  in some   way   (without  necessarily   attempting   or even   being  able  to
characterize   it).While  “characterization”   requires   the agent   to somehow     “understand”
novelty  in terms  of itsconceptual    system   (i.e.,accommodate       itat the conceptual    level),
“novelty  accommodation”      in the sense   used   here  only  means   to be  able  to deal  with it
behaviorally,  i.e.,work  with  or around   itfor the  purposes   of the  agent’s  task  (of course,
one  way  to accommodate       itisprecisely   to characterize   it).
        Detecting   novelty  does  not  automatically   “accommodate      it”,the  same   way  itdoes
not automatically   lead  to characterization    (e.g.,noticing  an  outlier to a distribution  or an
out-of-distribution  element   does   not update   the distribution  which   might  be  difficultor
itselfunknown    for certain  types  of distributions).  Whether   novelty   is,will,or ought   to be
accommodated       willdepend    on the  agent’s  goals  (a driving  agent  with  the goal  to get  to
a location  as quickly  as  possible  might   notice traffic cones   on the  street as  novel
objects, but  might  end  up  treating  them  simply   as obstacles   that  itneeds   to avoid
without  generating   new   representations    for them  or attempting    to determine   their
properties,  functions,  etc.). Novelty  accommodation,       thus, is, just as novelty  detection
dependent    on  the agent’s  goals,  knowledge,    etc.  depending    on the  task, the  same
agent  might  characterize   and   accommodate      the  same   “novel  experience”    differently.
Note  also  that accommodation      can  happen    with  and  without  learning  (e.g., avoiding
novel  obstacles   does  not  necessarily   require  the agent   to learn new   behaviors).

1.3  Core     requirements          for  accounts       of  novelty
Successful   accounts    of novelty  must,  at the very  least  do the  following:

    ●   define  novelty  as a  relation between    an  agent  and  an  entity: Novelty  is not  a
        property  of entities (concrete   or abstract),  but  rather an  epistemic   relation
        between   an  agent  and   an entity  to whom   the  entity is or isnot  novel.  The  theory
        needs   to define  what  itmeans    to be novel   foragents   by  making   recourse   to their
        architecture  and  the  functional  capabilities  enabled   by  the architecture   (e.g.,
        whether   there  are memories     of past experiences     that can  be  retrieved, whether
        there are  inference   processes    that can  generate   patterns,  etc.).

===== PDF PAGE 22 =====

   ●   not  solely focus   on patterns:  Whether    an  agent  has  seen   a particular  pattern  or
       whether    itcan  classify the  pattern  as belonging    to a particular pattern  type  is
       often  not  relevant  for semantic   or conceptual    novelties  which   do not  depend   on
       the  particulars  of patterns  so  much   as  they depend    on  finding the  right
       interpretation   in the right domain   (mapping    from  patterns   to concepts).
   ●   define  novelty   at different levels of abstraction:   Especially   with novelty  that is not
       pattern-based     (e.g.,conceptual    novelty  that might   be expressed    in familiar
       patterns),  it isimportant   to determine    the conceptual    spaces   in which  novelties
       are  detected,   where   the patterns   are a mere   means    for communication,     but  not
       the  domain   themselves     (e.g.,just take  any  formal  theory  with  countably   many
       formulas   over  an  uncountable    domain).

1.4  Evaluating        open-world         readiness
Since  novelty  and  thus  whether   itis being  detected   by  an agent   intrinsically depends    on
the agent,  the  question  arises  how   we  – as  outside  observers   of the  agent  – can   tell
whether   the agent   has  detected   novelty  and  whether   itaccommodated       it? This is the
same   question   that arises  with our  fellow humans    because,    unlike  artificialagents
where  in some    cases  “looking  inside”  might  be  possible  –  itisdefinitely  not possible  to
look inside  people’s  heads   (certainly  not at present).   But ifwe   cannot  look  inside  an
agent,  there is no  direct way   toassess    whether   itdetected   novelty, nor  whether   it
“accommodated”      novelty  in any  meaningful    sense   of the term;  i.e.,an  agent  might
encounter   something    that “ought”  to be  novel  for it(because    the agent   has  not
encountered    that entity, an  object say,  before),  but unless   this encounter   leads  to
behavior  that  counterfactually   would   have  been   different, there  isno  way   forus  to tell
whether   itdetected   itor whether   itonly  had  the “opportunity”   to detect  it;the same    goes
foraccommodation.       Of course,   we  could  ask  the agent   ifitcan  handle   questions,  but
that presumes    that the  agent  forms   a memory    of the  encounter   and  that that  memory    is
accessible   to introspection  in a way   that itcan  be  expressed    in a
human-understandable        form. As  designers    of novelty  detection  and  accommodation
evaluation  tasks,  we  need   to be  careful both  in the way   we  introduce   novelties  and  with
the kinds  of novelties  we  introduce,   to allow us  to at least determine    when   an  agent  has
the “opportunity”   to detect  novelty; this is the best  we  can  hope   for, short of the  agent
itselfallowing  for a conversation    about  its experiences    after the task.  An  “opportunity   to
detect novelty”   arises in the  case  of perceivable   objects  and   actions,  say, when   the
objects  or actions  are  inthe  agent’s  perceptual   range   and  when   the  agent  either has  the
perceptual   capability  todiscriminate   them   directly or indirectly  via context-based
inference;  hence,   agents  that  have  no  way  of detecting   a particular  novelty  cannot   be
blamed   for not discovering   it – nothing  is ever  novel  for a lamp.  Similarly,  whether   an
agent  truly accommodated       novelty  and  not just accidentally   acted  in a way   that seems
tosuggest    itdid, can  only be  determined    indirectly via the  agent’s  behavior   in a task

===== PDF PAGE 23 =====

where   accommodating      the  novelty  isthe  only way   for the agent   to succeed;   i.e.,a task
needs   tobe  designed    with a modification   in a way   that the  agent  (who   has  learned  to
solve the  task  without  the modification,   say), has  to detect  and   accommodate      the
novelty  in order to solve  it.
        We  should   thus  design  evaluations   with  the above   constraints   in mind:  first,make
modifications   to the task  settings  that require  the agents   to detect  novelties  (i.e.,
aspects  that  we  know   the agent   was  not  exposed   to because    they  were  not  present   in
the training/practice   setting the  agent  used  to learn  the  task) and  then  record   novelty
detection  opportunities   (to the extent  that  we  can)  and  determine   how   far in the task  the
agent  got. Note  that  we  should  not  use  action  costs  or “shortest  solution”  as
performance    measures     for novelty  detection  and  accommodation,       for novelty  detection
willoften  mean   to become    suboptimal,    to explore  and  learn  about  the  novelty  without
pursuing  the  task  goals. It
is,of course,  possible   to compare    the agent’s   performance    to best  possible
performance    assuming    an  agent  (incidentally)  acted  optimally   (e.g., because   itwas   able
toconsult   an oracle  about   what  to detect  and  what   to do with  it);however,   such
baselines   are themselves    meaningless     because    such  agents   are  unrealistic, but  they
can  serve  as a  yardstick  to compare    the performance     of different agents   to each   other
(especially  when   those  agents   failed at the task,  which  might   be likely depending    on  the
complexity   of the novelties   they have   to detect  and  accommodate).
        Itisalso  important   to keep  in mind   that, precisely  because    novelty  is an
agent-centric   property,  what  is novel  for one  agent  might   not be  novel  for another   agent.
This also  applies  when   we  compare    human    agents   (e.g., the designers    of artificial
agents  evaluating   an  artificialagent’s  abilityto handle   novelty)  to artificialagents.   When
we, as  agent  designers,   make    statements   about   something    being  novel  (without
qualifying  forwhom)    there  are  three interpretations:   (1) we  believe  itis novel  for the
artificialagent  under  consideration    based   on  what  we  know   about  the  agent  and   its
operation;  (2) we  believe  it’snovel   forany  agent   placed  in particular  settings  (based   on
the properties   of the setting  which  is such  that there  would   have  been   no  opportunity   for
any  agent  to experience    or derive  the novelty);  or (3) the  item is novel  from  our
perspective   (and  ifour  perspective   is the yardstick  as  agent  designers    ititmutatis
mutandum     novel  for the artificialagent).  Itis important   to not conflate  these   three
notions.  (1) can  typically be  assessed    and  potentially  be established   if the operation   of
the agent  is clear  enough   (which   might  not be  the  case  with self-learning   and
self-improving   systems   such   as deep   neural  networks    where   internal representations
cannot  be  clearly isolated  and   assessed;   in that case,  itmight   be necessary    to develop
externalized   evaluations   such  as  forcing  the agent  to come    up with  a known   or  new
label depending    on  whether   itsomething    is known   or novel).  (2) needs   to be  establish
through  formal  arguments     based   on precisely   characterizing   what  agents   can  potentially
know  and   why  the  situation will generate   something    new   (e.g.,“diagonalizing    out” of an

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====

agent’s  knowledge     can  produce   something    that  the agent   provably   cannot   know).  (3) is
usually  established   through   reflection  on  one’s  own  knowledge     and  then  simply
stipulated  about  the  artificialagent  (and  might,   as a result,  be false:  a “novel  object”  in
an image   for the  human    designer   might  not  be  “novel”  forthe  artificialagent  given   its
internal representations     of objects).

===== PDF PAGE 25 =====

2.  Architectural            developments               for   novelty        handling

We  introduce  the architectural  framework   with the  essential components     depicted  below
fordeveloping   novelty-aware    agents:






















Through   theirfunction  and  interactions, these  components    define  the agent’s
knowledge   repository  K, itsinference   algorithms  ⊢, and  operate  itssensors   𝜁and
effectors 𝛯.  The  agent  has  a DOMAIN     INTERFACE     component     that mediates   its
interactions with the  environment   through  the  sensors  𝜁 and  effectors 𝛯  (thiswill
typicallybe  itselfa set of components    for different sensors  and  effectors but  we  are not
concerned   with those  architectural  details inthis work).  Sensory   information  is
organized  into symbolic   state descriptions  𝑠 ∈  S and  passed   on  toother  components
forprocessing,   including recognized    actions of other  actors in the environment.
Additionally, subsymbolic   perceptions   𝑋 (e.g. images)   acquired  by  the sensors  are  also
made   available by  the DOMAIN     INTERFACE.     The  knowledge    base  𝐾𝐵  ∈  K   stores
facts using  about  the environment    as extracted  from  state description  obtained   from the
domain   interface, as well as the  operators   available to the agent.  The  GOAL
MANAGER      and  TASK   PLANNER      are the symbolic   inference  mechanisms     of the
architecture. The  GOAL    MANAGER      detects  novelty  by comparing    inferred expected
state descriptions  from  rules and  facts in𝐾𝐵  to state descriptions   obtained  through  the
DOMAIN    INTERFACE.      The  TASK   PLANNER      generates   plans for the agent  to execute
inthe environment.    The  GOAL    MANAGER      also detects  novelty  due  to plan failure.
Whenever    novelty is detected,  itis submitted  to the 𝐾𝐵  for further inference  and
exploration.

===== PDF PAGE 26 =====

The  subsymbolic    knowledge    repository  𝛩 ∈   K ,along   with the VISION    MODEL     and
AGENT    MODEL     components,     make   up the  probabilistic inference  algorithms   of the
agent. The   VISION   MODEL     receives  subsymbolic    state  descriptions  (e.g., images)   and
detects  out-of-distribution samples    using  statisticalmethods.   The  AGENT     MODEL
receives  symbolic   state descriptions   and, with  statisticalmethods,   monitors   the behavior
ofother  actors  in the environment    to detect when   their behavior   isinconsistent   with the
agent’s  expectations.   When   either component     detects  novelty, itsends   a description  of
the novelty  to the 𝐾𝐵.  The  NOVELTY     EXPLORATION        component     is comprised   of
symbolic  novelty  exploration   algorithms,  as well  as a reinforcement    learner  that can
learn policies to form  new   executors   ifnecessary.   Itaccepts  a  description  of the novelty
and  symbolic  state  from  the 𝐾𝐵.  Itreturns  sub-goals  to the  GOAL    MANAGER      that aim
toexplore   the environment    or specifications  of operators   that can  be used   toaid  in
solving task  𝑇 .The   operation  of these  components     isdescribed   in detail in subsequent
sections.

2.1  Symbolic       inference
Symbolic   inference  is performed   by  the GOAL    MANAGER       and  TASK   PLANNER      on
facts and  rules from  the 𝐾𝐵  to solve  task 𝑇  and  todetect  and  characterize   novelties  .

2.1.1  Knowledge       Base
The  knowledge    base  𝐾𝐵  ∈  K   stores facts  about  symbolic   state descriptions   using  the
language   .Itis populated   with facts  and  rules defined  a priori and  through  interaction
with the environment.    This may   include  objects,  actors, functions,  symbolic   state
representations,   and  a semantic   type  hierarchy  used  to describe   planning  tasks.
During  execution,  other  components     in the architecture  may   assert, retract or query
facts in𝐾𝐵  to detect  novelty,  create plans,  or store  new  knowledge.    The  𝐾𝐵  is part of the
knowledge    repository  against  which   novelties  are detected.   As a  result,when
information  about  a detected   and  explored   novelty  isasserted   into 𝐾𝐵,  subsequent
encounters   with itwill no longer  be  novel  forthe  agent.  This is not limited to novelties
detected  using  symbolic   inference,  as novelties  detected   with probabilistic  inference  are
also eventually  expressed    in and  stored  in𝐾𝐵.

2.1.2.  Task   Planner
The  TASK   PLANNER      is one  ofthe  two  symbolic  inference   mechanisms     utilizingthe  𝐾𝐵.
Once  a  desired  goal state  description  𝑠𝑔 is received  from  the GOAL    MANAGER,       the
TASK   PLANNER      retrieves a  planning  domain   definition 𝛴  (operators,  predicates,  etc.)
and  an initialstate description  𝑠0  from the  𝐾𝐵  to form a  planning  task  𝑇 and  searches   for
a plan  P ⊳ 𝑇  .Whether    a plan is found  or not, along  with  the plan  itself,isthen
submitted  to the  GOAL    MANAGER      for further inference   and  execution.

===== PDF PAGE 27 =====

2.1.3.  Goal   Manager
The  GOAL    MANAGER       isresponsible   for managing    the agent’s  top-level  goal(s), which
can consist  of multiple  concurrent   goals, and   isresponsible   for detecting  novelties  in
symbolic  state  descriptions.  The  component     submits   goals to the  TASK   PLANNER      and
performs  inference   on  state descriptions,  a process   during  which   novelties  ofdifferent
types may   arise due   toplanning   failure,execution   failure, or unexpected    aspects   of
state descriptions.  Once   a novelty  is detected,  the  GOAL    MANAGER      produces    a
description  of itand  asserts  itto the 𝐾𝐵.  Depending    on  the novelty  type, the  NOVELTY
EXPLORATION        component    (see  Section  2.3)  may  be  invoked.  The  GOAL    M  ANAGER
isalso  the primary  component     communicating     with the  DOMAIN     INTERFACE.

Prohibitive novelties  that prevent   task completion.   Prohibitive  novelties  are  most  often
encountered    due  to the failure of the TASK   PLANNER.      For  a given  goal, the  GOAL
MANAGER      consults   the TASK   PLANNER      for a plan   to execute.  Ifthe  TASK   PLANNER
failsto find a plan for a particular  goal, assuming    that the goal  is achievable   based   on
the agent’s  knowledge,    then  the failure may  be  due  to an  prohibitive novelty.

Obstructive  novelties  that make    task accomplishment      harder. Obstructive   novelty  is
most  likelyencountered     due  to plan execution   failure. Once  a  plan sequence    has  been
generated,   the GOAL    MANAGER       enters  an execution   phase   where   itverifies that each
operator’s  preconditions   are  met. In this inference  task,  the D  OMAIN    INTERFACE      is
consulted  to verify that the  preconditions   𝜓𝑜  of an operator   𝑜 ∈  O  hold  in the current
symbolic  description   of the environment    state. Ifinference   on prior states  indicates  that
allof the operator’s  preconditions    𝜓𝑜 should   be met,  but  they are  not in the current
state, thisconstitutes   a novelty. Ifall preconditions   are met,  the executor   𝜒𝑜 of the
operator  is sent to and  executed   by  the DOMAIN     INTERFACE       component.    The  agent
may  receive  feedback    through  the DOMAIN      INTERFACE      component    indicating  the
success   or failureof the  executor.  In case  of failure when   success   was  anticipated,  this
again  constitutes  novelty. Additionally,  obstructive  novelty  may   occur  even  when   an
executor  succeeds,    ifitseffects are  not consistent   with the agent’s  expectations.

Beneficial  and  nuisance   novelties  that either help  or distract.Success    in the task  does
not eliminate  the possibility of novelty.  The  GOAL    MANAGER       may  stillencounter
beneficial or nuisance   novelties  during  its inference  of the expected    state of the world.
Ifthe inferred  state does  not  match  the  observed   state  ofthe  world  solicited from  the
DOMAIN     INTERFACE,      then that  stillconstitutes a novelty,  regardless   of itseffect on  the
task. Otherwise,   plan  execution  continues   until alloperators   in the plan have   been
executed.

===== PDF PAGE 28 =====

Inall cases  where   novelty  is detected,  a  symbolic  description   of itisasserted   to 𝐾𝐵  and
sent to the NOVELTY      EXPLORATION        component,     which  utilizes different exploration
policies depending    on  the way  novelty  is encountered.

2.2.  Probabilistic       inference

The  architecture’s  probabilistic  inference  components     are  used  to detect  novelty  in the
subsymbolic    state representations    𝑋 as  well as in statistical relationships  between
elements   of the state  descriptions  S. The   knowledge    repository  𝛩  ∈  K  stores  the
agent’s  knowledge    of these  modalities  in the  form  ofmachine    learning  model
parameters.   The  firstcomponent     for probabilistic inference   is VISION   MODEL,     which
implements    a visual novelty  detector  based   on  images   from  the DOMAIN      INTERFACE.
The  second   component     of probabilistic inference   isan  AGENT     MODEL     that models   the
behavior  of other  actors  in the world  to detect  deviations  from  their known   behaviors   If
either module   detects  model   deviations   with sufficient confidence,   a symbolic
representation   of the hypothesized    novelty  is submitted   to the knowledge     base  for
further inference  and  exploration.

2.2.1.  Vision   Model    (see   also   Section    3)
The  VISION   MODEL     is responsible   for detecting  visual  novelty. At every   step, the
DOMAIN     INTERFACE      provides   a 2-dimensional    color image   of the  agent’s  current  view
ofthe  world. The   VISION   MODEL’s     task  isto determine    whether   each  new   input image
represents   a plausible  view  of the known   standard   environment,    or a different  “novel”
distribution. Some   authors   refer to similar problems   as  anomaly    detection  or
out-of-distribution detection   (Ruff, Kauffmann,    Vandermeulen,     Montavon,    Samek,    Kloft,
Dietterich and  Müller,  2021).  Visual  novelties  could  include  new  object  types,  new  agent
appearances,    or new   backgrounds.    Scene   composition    properties  could  also  change
(sizes, frequencies,   relative locations,  etc.). To  solve the  detection  problem,   our  VISION
MODEL     takes  a deep  autoencoder     approach,   following  Abati, Porrello,  Calderara   and
Cucchiara   (2019).  Deep   autoencoders     are often  applied  to visual novelty  detection   for
theirability to learn effective  representations   of data  through   self-supervision   (Pang,
Shen,  Cao   and  Hengel,  2022).   The  model   consists  of two  component    neural  networks:
an encoder   e𝜙  with  weights  𝜙  that maps   image   𝑋 to a code   vector 𝑧 ∈  ℝ𝐶   ,
and  a decoder   d𝜙′ with  weights  𝜙′ that maps   code   vector  𝑧back   to an image   𝑋. After a
model  is suitably  trained (see  below),  given  a new   image   X̃,the model   assesses
possible  novelty  via reconstruction   error: 𝑟(X̃;𝜙,𝜙′)=||X̃-𝑑𝜙′ (𝑒𝜙  (X̃))||2,which  measures
Euclidean   distance  between    the input  and  itsreconstruction.   Intuitively,a well-trained
model  should   have  low  reconstruction   error for images   that represent   the  normal
environment    used  for training, while  images   containing  novelty  will yield higher  error.
The  effectiveness   of thisnovelty  detection   method   is determined

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====

by the separability   ofthe  normal   and  novel  reconstruction   error distributions  (Richter
and  Roy,  2017).  The  VISION    MODEL     can  pass  the  reconstruction   error signal  directly to
the Symbolic   Inference.   Naturally, we   can  also apply  a threshold   𝜏 to produce   binary
detection  decisions,  where   “novelty”  is called if 𝑟(X̃)> 𝜏 and  “normal”   otherwise.  The
value  of𝜏 can  be  selected   on a validation  set  containing  labeled   examples    of normal
and  novel  data  tomaximize    a  performance    metric  of interest.
       The   VISION   MODEL     can  be  trained  in advance   on  a dataset   of images   depicting
the “normal”  environment.    Given   𝑁  training images,   we  seek  encoder    and  decoder
weights  𝜙, 𝜙′ that minimize    the total reconstruction   error: ∑𝑛  𝑟(𝑋𝑛;𝜙,𝜙).  This  can  be
solved  via stochastic  gradient   descent   (Abati et al.,2019),   and  the optimal  weights   𝜙, 𝜙
stored  within 𝛩  forlater processing.    Ifthe  VISION   MODEL      detects  abnormal    images,   it
generates   a description   that  issent  to 𝐾𝐵.  The  description  includes   an identifier that
allows  the 𝐾𝐵  to associate   a visually-detected   novelty   with the state  description  of the
environment    state in which  it was  observed.

2.2.2.  Agent    Model    (see   also   Section    4)
The  AGENT     MODEL     isa  crucial part of the  architecture  when   operating   in multi-agent
environments.    Ituses  probabilistic  inference   over symbolic   state  descriptions   and  is
responsible   for maintaining   knowledge    about  other  actors.  The  aim  of the AGENT
MODEL     isto evaluate   whether   facts about   other agents   contained   in symbolic   state
descriptions  are  consistent  with  itsknowledge     of those  agents’  behavior.  One   major
factor we  consider   here  isthe  types  of other agents.

Behavioral   modeling   with  behavioral  cloning.  The   main  approach    of the AGENT     MODEL
isto model   other  agents’  behaviors   via behavioral   cloning  (Bain  and  Sammut,     1995;
Daftry, Bagnell  and  Hebert,   2016;  Argall, Chernova,    Veloso   and  Browning,    2009)  which
isan  offline reinforcement   learning   technique   that learns  policies from  a  dataset  of actor
trajectories. That  dataset  can  be  collected  from  repeated   interactions  with  the
environment    and  the policies  are learned   using  supervised   learning.
       Suppose     other actors  𝛷  identified in the state  descriptions   have   actor-types   ina
set 𝑄, also  provided   inthe  state description.  For  each   type 𝑞 ∈   𝑄, the AGENT     MODEL
learns the  policy 𝜋(𝑎|𝑠, 𝑞) of an  agent  of type  𝑞. Itisimplemented     with  a neural  network
nn𝜃  (𝑠,𝑞), which  outputs  the  probability  of actions  inthe  action  space  𝐴𝑞  of the
agent  of type 𝑞. Here   the input  (𝑠,𝑞) is represented   as  a feature  vector.  Ifnecessary,
other representations    such  as  graphs   and  text can  also be  consumed     by  neural
networks.   Ifcomplete   knowledge     ofanother   actor’s  state is not known,   then  a
pseudo-state   𝑠′ can  be inferred  using  knowledge    in . Then  the  model   becomes    nn𝜃(𝑠′,𝑞)
and  the action  likelihood  can  be estimated.   The  model   is trained  via supervised   learning
using  the true actions  each   actor took  at that state  (described   insymbolic
representations).   The  resulting  model   parameters    𝜃 are  stored  in 𝛩 and  used   to

===== PDF PAGE 30 =====

evaluate  action  likelihoods  during   execution.  The   exact  architecture,  hyper-parameters,
training procedure    and  feature  representation    isalso  application   dependent    and  is
discussed   in the experiment    section.

Unlikely  action detection.   During  operation,   the AGENT     MODEL      uses  the learned   neural
network   to monitor  an  actor’s  behaviors   and  detect  unlikely  actions.  Our  agent  may
encounter   actors  that deviate   from  their actor-type’s  policy. Such   an  event  is
inconsistent  with  the agent’s   in the  sense  that  the actors  exhibit  behavior   that isunlikely
under  the  actor policies  encoded    in 𝛩. Such   novelty  can  be  detected   by evaluating   the
likelihood of observed    actions  using  nn𝜃   .Focusing    on a  single actor  of type  𝑞 ∈  𝑄  and
itsaction  𝑎 ∈  𝐴𝑞  from  a symbolic   state  description   𝑠∈   ,the  likelihood  under  the  learned
model   iscomputed     by 𝑙̂= nn𝜃  (𝑠, 𝑞).Then,   𝑙̂iscompared     to previously  encountered
values  to decide   if𝑎 deviates  from  the  known   distribution.  For instance,   ifnn𝜃  is trained
offlinewith  a dataset   oftrajectories  from  the  environment,    then  a portion  of the dataset
can  be used   for validation  to set a threshold   below   which  actions  are  considered
inconsistent  with  the model   for that actor  type.

Actor type  classification.  Using  the  model   nn𝜃,  the AGENT     MODEL     can  also  classify
actors  into the known   actor  types  𝑄.  During  operation,   a voting  scheme    over  the 𝑄
known   actor  types  isused   to classify actors  into types   using  their action  likelihoods, see
the algorithm   below:
















The  predicted   types  can  be compared     with  the types  extracted   from  the symbolic
description  to determine    ifsome   actors  deviate  from   theiractor  types.  Ifthe  the AGENT
MODEL     detects  novelties  due   to unexpected    actor  behavior,  itcan  provide   feedback    to
the rest of the  architecture  for accommodation.      It produces   a  symbolic   description  𝜈 that
includes  the state  description   inwhich   novelty  was   detected,  any   unlikely actions
detected  for each   actor  inthe  environment    and  an  indicator  of the inferred  agent-types

===== PDF PAGE 31 =====

using  the vote-based    classifier,ifthey  deviate  from  those  expected.    The  novelty
description  is submitted   to the 𝐾𝐵  and  used   for accommodation      ifnecessary.

2.3.  Novelty      Exploration        Component

The  NOVELTY      EXPLORATION        component     receives  symbolic   descriptions   of novelties
from  the GOAL    MANAGER       and  is responsible   for generating   exploration   strategies
depending    on the  type of novelty  encountered.    These   include   heuristic search   strategies
on the  symbolic   descriptions  of states  (and  on  failed operators)  as  well as
knowledge-guided      reinforcement   learning-based     exploration  to learn  new  executors   for
existing failed operators.

Knowledge    discovery.   Ifthe NOVELTY      EXPLORATION        component     receives   a novelty
description  before  the  agent  attempts   to generate   a plan, then  the  type of the  novelty
(i.e.how  itmay   impact  its abilityto solve  the task)  has  not yet  been  determined.    In that
case,  a knowledge    discovery   routine  isutilized to gather  information   about  the
encountered    novelty. The   exploration  strategy  is dependent    on  the symbolic   description
ofthe  novelty  and  can  involve  exploratory   subgoals   and  operators   related  to the novelty.
Ifadditional  information  is gathered,   itis appended    to the symbolic   novelty  descriptions
and, ifnecessary,    used  for additional  exploration   and  recovery.  For  instance,  ifa novel
actor is encountered,    the NOVELTY      EXPLORATION        component     would   submit  subgoals
tothe  GOAL    MANAGER       that would   involve  interactions  with the  novel  actor. These
subgoals   are generated    using  the agent’s   type hierarchy:   known   operators   applicable  to
known   actors  are used   on the  novel  actor. Such   interactions  may   reveal  additional
information  about   the novelty  and  aid in further  failurerecovery   depending    on  the
novelty  type.

4.3.1.  Failure   recovery
The  FAILURE    RECOVERY        component     isresponsible    fordeploying   recovery   strategies
fornovelty  accommodation       and  isinvoked   when   novelty  causes   a  planning  or execution
failure.Depending     on the  novelty  description  itreceives,   itemploys   various  recovery
strategies  to address   the particular  failure. The  left part of the figure below   illustrates
the agent’s  recovery   policies for different failure cases   attributed  to novelty. Special
attention is paid  when   novelty  isattributed  to the effect  failure ofan  operator.  The  right
part of the figure shows    indetail the  strategies  employed    when   an  operator’s  known
effects are inconsistent   with  the state description   after itsexecution.

===== PDF PAGE 32 =====

Depending    on  the severity  of the  failure, the agent   employs    different recovery
strategies.  Ifthe state  description   isconsistent   with  only a  subset  of the  operator’s
effects (partial effect failure), then  the  𝐾𝐵  isupdated    with the  new   effects, and  the  agent
attempts   to replan.  Ifinstead,  none   of the operator’s   effects  are observed    (total effect
failure),the  agent  attempts   to discover   new   operators   that may   assist it insolving  the
task. This  process   involves  hypothesizing     new  preconditions,    a heuristic  search   over
known   operators   to uncover   unknown     effects, and   a reinforcement-learning     based
exploration  methodology      that learns  new   executors   for failed operators   (see  also
Section  5). These   strategies   may   be executed    in the order  presented,    or may   be applied
tonovelties   at any  order  depending    on  the domain    implementation     and  novelty
descriptions.  Overall   the failure recovery   policies  are  general  and   flexible,as  each   may
be involved   in recovery   from  multiple  novelty  types  and   they can  be  composed     to
recover  from  complex    failures.

===== PDF PAGE 33 =====

3.  Visual       novelty        detection

3.1  New     benchmark         dataset:     NovelCraft
We  developed    and  published  (Feeney    etal. 2023)  a new   open-access    dataset,  which
we  callNovelCraft,   forassessing    novelty detection   and  accommodation      from both  visual
and  multi-modal   observed   data. This  dataset  is builtfrom  prerecorded    imagery  obtained
from an  agent  exploring  the  Polycraft POGO     environment    released  by  our TA1  partners
atUT-Dallas.   This  dataset  makes   visual detection   inthis challenging   open-world
environment   accessible   to researchers   around   the globe  who   want  to focus  on visual
processing   rather than  build fullyinteractive  agents.























 Example   contents   of our new   multi-modal   NovelCraft  dataset.  Left: Select  image
 frames  from  two  normal  episodes   (rows  1-2)  and  two novel  episodes   (rows  3-4).
 Typical episodes   contain  40-60   frames.  Detection   ischallenging   as only  a few  images
 innovel  episodes   actually  contain  novel  objects, here  outlined  inorange   when   visible.
 Right: Example    symbolic   information  available  at each  frame.  At each  frame,  we
 record  a complete   JSON    representation   of the player  state and  allobjects  and
 artificialagents  inthe  world (x,z,y position  in 3D, orientation,  etc.).This  includes
 objects  outside  the player’s view  recorded   in images.

Our  NovelCraft  dataset   addresses   the program    goal of principled   characterization
and  detection.   It contains  imagery   of an open   world scene   in a MineCraft-like   world
from the  perspective   ofan  agent  attempting   to complete   a task (build  a pogo  stick). The

===== PDF PAGE 34 =====

movement    of the  agent  ensures   that novelties  are depicted   from  a variety  of
perspectives.   Our  data is grouped   into episodes,   where   each  episode   is one  attempt  at
the task by  the agent.  Within  each  episode,   the open   world  scene   isconsistent   and
evolving  over  time, with sensory   information   captured   at each  step  ofthe  agent
completing   the task. Thus   computer   vision  models   can  be  tested on  data  representative
ofan  integrated  AI  system  operating   in an open   world  without  having  to spend   time  and
computational   resources    rerunning  the  environment    and  agent.  Labels  are  provided  for
each  episode   denoting  whether   there  is novelty  and  what  the novelty  is. This enables
evaluations  to measure    novelty  detection  performance     and  the ability ofmodels    to infer
novel concepts.
       This  dataset  should   substantially  improve   evaluation  practices  in the  research
community    compared    to what  is currently  done  in the status  quo.  Most  existing  methods
fornovelty  detection   are evaluated   on  datasets  like CIFAR-10    and  ImageNet,    which
were  originally intended   forsupervised    classification of visual object  types.  However,
these  datasets  tend  to be object-focused    and  do  not have   images   representative   of
open  world  scenes,   where  novelties   may  not be  large, centered,   or fullyvisible in the
images.  Some    recent  works,  like the Common     Objects   in Context  (COCO-2014)
dataset, have   developed    datasets  that depict  complex   visual  scenes   similar to open
worlds. These   datasets   include  only one   image  per  scene,  which   limitstheir applicability
toan  AI system   operating   in a consistent  open   world  scene  over  time.

3.2  Evaluation       of  Detection       on   NovelCraft
Inthe  NovelCraft   paper  (Feeney   et al. 2023),  we  evaluate   visual, symbolic,  and
multimodal   models’   abilityto algorithmically  detect  novelties  during  an episode.   Visual
models   are provided   with image   data,  symbolic  models    are provided   with JSON    data
representing   the state of the  world, and  multimodal    models   ensemble    the outputs  of
each  of those  models.   The  symbolic   model   detects  novelty  by extrapolating   from
previous  world  states, so  we  test the model   when   given  a sequence    of 2 or 5 previous
states to extrapolate   from.













 Table  1 (from  Feeney    et al2023):  Episodic   novelty  detection  performance     (higher is

===== PDF PAGE 35 =====

 better for allbut  delay) on  test episodes   where   the novelty   isdetectable   by both  visual
 and  symbolic   methods.   Multimodal    models   perform  better  than  either visual-alone   or
 symbolic-alone    models.

Overall, we  find that multimodal    ensembles    that combining    algorithmic  novelty  detection
techniques   from  both  vision and  symbolic   data  types  tend  to reach  the highest   level of
performance,    especially  in “area-under-the-curve”     metrics.  This arises  from  an
ensemble’s   ability to take advantage    of visual  and  symbolic   methods’   differing
performance    on  novelties  at different levels of abstraction.  We   further find that models
with more   context  perform   better (5 step  isrecommended       over  2 step).
       Another   key  takeaway    from  our work   isthat different methods    may   be
recommended      depending    on  whether   false positives  or false negatives   are  more
important  to minimize.    Looking  at detector   performance    in the true positive  rate (TPR)
equals  95%   regime   represents   the case  where   finding  allnovelties  is most  important
(prioritizingmodels   that avoid  false  negatives).  The  multimodal    5-step  model   performs
the best, with  the visual model   getting  similar performance     while slightly reducing   the
number   of frames   in an episode   before  the  novelty  isdetected   (delay).  Looking  at the
regime  when   positive  predictive  value  (PPV,  aka  precision)  equals   95%   represents   the
case  where   being  confident  that a predicted   novelty  is really novel  ismost   important
(prioritizingmodels   that reduce   false positives).  The  multimodal   5-step  model   provides
the best  overall performance,    but  the symbolic   and  multimodal   2-step  model   can  better
identify normal  episodes   though   at the  expense   of novel  episodes.

3.3  Evaluation        of novelty      characterization         on   NovelCraft
Moving   beyond   simple  visual  novelty  detection,  we  investigated   generalized   category
discovery  (GCD)    isa task  that provides   a principled  approach   to characterization    of
visual novelties.  GCD   assumes    a  set of normal   data labeled   with examples    of different
classes.  Given  a set  of unlabeled   data, some   of which   may  be  novel,  GCD   aims   to
group  the unlabeled   data  into both  the normal   classes   and  new  novel  classes.  In the
context  of an integrated   AI in an open   world  environment,    the goal  of GCD   is to
determine   whether   incoming   data  is from  a normal  environment,    a  novel  environment
that has  been  seen   before, or a  novel  environment    that is new  to the agent.
       When    evaluating   GCD   methods    on  NovelCraft   (Feeney   et al.2023),   we  found
that current GCD    models   need   to be made    more  robust  to class  imbalance    to be
suitable for an  open  world  environment    setting.  Our  experiments    utilized a long tailed
class frequency   distribution,  which  assumes    that there  are  a few  normal  classes   with
lotsof data  and  a mix  of normal   and  novel  classes  with  significantly less data.  The
model’s  strong  performance     on normal   data,  listedas  labeled  in the table, can  be
attributed to successfully   recognizing   data  from  normal   classes  with lots of data.

===== PDF PAGE 36 =====

Although   some    of the  less  frequent   classes   are  successfully    clustered,   future  work  is
needed    to achieve   this result  consistently    and  raise  the  accuracy    for novel,  listed as
new  in the  table,  data.

3.4   Integration        of  vision    into   DIARC        agent

To provide  algorithmic  novelty  detection  for our team’s   integrated  AI system,   DIARC,   we
provided  a visual  autoencoder    novelty detection   model.  Our  experiments    found  that
autoencoders    perform  surprisingly  well in open  world  settings,  being  more  robust  and
outperforming   state of the  artnovelty  detection  models   for object-focused    datasets.
Autoencoders    also  perform  well under   a variety of thresholding   regimes,  making   the  model
flexibleenough    tobe  quickly  adjusted  to satisfy the needs   of our agent  development     team.

Our  TA1  partner  from UT-Dallas    generously   provided  an  evaluation  of our  visual novelty
detection  module   on the  subset  of their novelties that include  new,  visually  distinctobjects  in the
environment.   This  includes  novelties  such  as trees  with different colored  bark  or new  fence
objects. Novelties  that vary  visual stimuli seen   inthe  normal  environment,    such  as trees
producing   more  logs  when  broken   without  changes   to the tree  or log visuals, are  not included.
This evaluation   also disabled  the  agent  team’s  novelty  detection  system   in order to evaluate   the
visual novelty  detection  module   in isolation. However,   the agent   isstillinformed  by  the visual
novelty detection   module   inorder  to determine   when   exploration  of the  environment   is
necessary.



 method                     M1:  Fn_CDT                 M2:  CDT%                  M2.1:  FP%

 Patch   AE   @  36  mo     6.70                        27.8%                      58.3%

 Patch   AE   @  42  mo     3.44                        56.6%                      34.1%

 Table:  Progress    of  our vision-only   agent   at novelty   detection   on  Polycraft   via a
 third-party   evaluation   by  TA1,  in terms   of SAILON     metrics.   First row   represents    the
 agent   at 36  months,    final row  represents    our  performance     after  42  months.


Our  initialevaluation  at36  months   revealed   two weaknesses     of the  visual novelty  detection
module.  First, we  found  that our validation  set of novelties  provided   by UTD   was  significantly
less challenging   than the  novelties UTD   tested  us  on. This led  us to more   aggressively   reduce
the number   of false positives  when   choosing   a threshold  for our  model.  Second,   we  found  that
the novelties  we  performed   worst  on  were  very different from  the  novelties in our  validation set.
Increasing  the variety  of novelties in our  validation set through   further data  collection allowed   us
tomore   accurately  predict  how  the  model  would   generalize  to UTD’s   evaluation.  Our  final
evaluation  showed    significant improvement    and  suggests   that our  vision module   complements
the DIARC    agent’s other  novelty  detection  modules    moving   forward.

===== PDF PAGE 37 =====

4.  Agent        novelty       detection          and     accommodation

We  developed    new  machine   learning  algorithms   to detect novelties  encountered    by  the
agent. In particular, we  have  innovated   models   for detecting  novelties  in the i.i.d.and
time series  settings. We  also  have  investigated   methods   to update   classifiers ina
gradient-free  fashion.

4.1  GAN      ensemble       for  novelty     detection

Inour  work  of detecting  novelties, we  innovated   Generative    Adversarial  Networks
(GANs)   to detect novelties  more   accurately.  GANs   are  powerful  models   for detecting
novelties in the data,  however,   they are  hard  totrain: the training procedure    ofa  GAN
model  is a min-max   problem,   whose   optimal
solutions are  hard  toreach.  In the novelty
detection  task, the discriminator  is usually
used  to compute   representations    to
distinguish normal   examples    and  novel ones.
Ifthe discriminator  is not well trained, then  its
abilityindetecting   novelties is compromised.
       We   addressed   this problem   by  using
an ensemble    of generators   and
discriminators  in the GAN   model   to greatly
improve  the  model  performance    over
previous  GAN-based     novelty  detection
models.  In our work,  we  used   multiple
discriminators  and  generators   in the GAN
fornovelty  detection.  In our ensemble    model,  a  generative  model   was  an  auto-encoder:
itperturbed  a normal   example   to generate   a “fake” example.    Each  discriminator
received  “fake” samples   from  multiple  generators,   and  the discriminator  was  trained  to
distinguish these  fake  examples    from normal   examples.   Therefore,   allthese  samples
provide  better profiling ofnormal   examples,   and  thus  a discriminator’s  ability in
detecting  novel instances   is enhanced.    To further  improve  the  detection  performance,
we also  concatenate    learned  representations   from  alldiscriminators   to enrich  the
information.
       We   have  conducted    an extensive   empirical  study  ofthe  proposed   model.
Compared    with a  previous  GAN   model,   the representations   from  a GAN    ensemble
better distinguished  abnormal    examples    from normal   ones.  We   tested our  model  on
several novelty-detection    tasks, and  the proposed    model  significantly outperformed
previous  GAN-based     detection  models.

===== PDF PAGE 38 =====

4.2  Novelty      detection      in  time   series
The  detection  of novelties  also  needs  to consider   the context   ofthe  data. This  is
especially  true in the tasks  of detecting  novelties  from  time  series  data. For  example,   a
hot day  isnormal,   a hot day  after a  cold day  with freezing  temperature    is not normal.
Therefore,  a  novelty  detection  model   needs   to be able  to model   the relationship
between   data  entries.
















Inthis part of the  work,  we  devised   a new  novelty  detection   model   that was  able  to
model  both  temporal   relationships   and  relationships  between    feature  entries each   time
step. To capture   the temporal   relationship,  we  used   an autoregressive    predictive  model.
To capture  relationships   between    feature entries,  we  proposed   a  new  asked   training
strategy. In each  step,  we  masked    out some   data  entries  and  letthe  model   predict these
masked   entries  based   on  other data  entries  and  previous  steps.  With  the new   training
strategy, the model   had  an  enhanced    ability to capture  relationships   between   data
entries in the current  time  step. Italso  captured   the relationship  between    data  in the
time step  and  data  from  previous  time  steps  through   the autoregressive    model.   We
further developed    a transformer-based     neural  network   as an  autoregressive    predictive
model.  This  new  model   had  stronger   abilitiesto learn  from  the data  than  recurrent
neural  networks.
       We   tested  this model   on Polycraft  and  Monopoly    tasks.  Our  experiments
indicated  that the strategy  of masked    training does   improve   the performance     of novelty
detection.

4.3  Fast    adaptation       after   detecting      novelties
Once  a  model   detects  a novel  object, itshould   be updated    to remember    the  object and
not detect  itas a novelty  in the  future. Ideally, the model   update   should  be  fast and  need
littletraining,instead  of running  further  optimization   iterations to learn new   concepts.
Learning  new   concepts   has  been   studied  in the field ofcontinual   learning. However,    the

===== PDF PAGE 39 =====

focus  ofthe  research   in thisfield is to avoid  forgetting previously   learned   concepts,   and
itrarely concerns   the  computation    issue.
       In this part of the  work,  we  devised   a learning  model   that was   updated   without
gradient-based    optimization.  It combines    the strength  of neural  networks    and
K-nearest-neighbor     classifiers (KNN).   We   used  a neural  network   as  a flexible feature
extractor and   did not need   to update   itinnew   tasks  because    representation   learning














could  be done   on the  training set. We   used  a  KNN   classifier as a  classification head
because   itrequires   littlecomputation   to update   the classifier: we  only  needed   to add
representations   of a  few new   examples.    When   an  example    of a seen  novelty  type  was
fed to the classifier, itgets  itsrepresentation    from  the neural  network   and  then  is
classified by  the KNN   into the  known   novelty  type.  Compared     to a pure  neural  model,
which  needs   expensive    computations    to get updated,   our  model   has  a clear advantage
oflow  cost  inmodel   updates.
       We   tested  our  model  in a series  of benchmark     tasks  and  showed    that our model
has the  abilityto adapt   to new  classification  tasks.

===== PDF PAGE 40 =====

5.  Inference-based                  novelty        detection

The  main  methodology     that was  used  in novelty  detection  was   having  two  modules,   one
fordetecting  novelty  with  respect  to the environment    and  another   with respect  to the
agent  which  we  use  both  inMonopoly    and  Polycraft,  even  though   the details  ofthe
detection  were  different given  the differences   inthe  tasks  and  settings (e.g.,
observability, stochasticity,  etc.). The  firstcovered   the environment    and  event  novelties
inM42   and  the second   covered   the  goal novelties  in M42.   For  the firstwe  developed
an accurate   simulation  of how   the environment    would  change    ina normal   situation and
compared    that with the observation    about  the environment.    When   there  was  a
difference  between   our  expectation   based  on  the simulation   with our observation,
novelties were   detected.  For  the second,   we  developed    a simulation  of the normal   agent
behavior  and  compared    that with  the observation   about  the  agent.  When   there  was  a
difference  – beyond   a well-designed    threshold  – between    our expectation   based   on  the
simulation  with our  observation,   novelties were   detected.
       For  novelty  characterization,   we  firstdetected  ifitwas   an agent  related  novelty
(such  as a goal  novelty)  or not; ifnot then  ifan environment    related  novelty  was
detected,  then  we  analyzed   the difference  between    the environment    expected    and  the
environment   observed    and  based   on that made    the characterization   of whether   itwas
an environment    novelty  or an  event  novelty,
       For  novelty  accommodation      we  used  a two  stage  MCTS    (Monte   Carlo  Tree
Simulation)  rollout method   (to be  described   inSection   7).

5.1  ASP-based          novelty     detection

Our  ASP  novelty  detection   component    for Monopoly    isan  inference-based    novelty
detection  module   where   we  perform  simulations   based   on the  environment    states and
actions (we  used   a similar module   for Polycraft  as well). Specifically, given  the current
game   board  state, a sequence    of actions,  and  a ground   truth next game   board   state, we
inferthe  next state  by executing   actions  on the  current state  with ASP.  If the inferred
next state deviates   from  the ground   truth next state, our  ASP   novelty  detection  module
willreport novelty.  The  intuition isthat ifthere  isany  novelty  during  inference,  for
example,   a new  sell factor or a new   color for a property,  the inferred  next state  using  the
current knowledge    will deviate  from  the ground   truth next state.  Advantages     ofusing
ASP  simulator   to perform  inference   include that  ASP  rules  can  be automatically
generated   from  PDDL   descriptions   in any  action domain,   and  a large  varieties of
novelties can  be  covered   without  caring  too much   about  what  those  novelties  are  and
theirnovelty  hierarchy   since we  only  care  about  whether   deviation  exists. Below   we  first
give a glimpse   of how  ASP   can  be  used  for reasoning   about  the next  state and  how   that
code  can  be minimally   modified  to infer a novelty.  In the  Monopoly    game,  to reason

===== PDF PAGE 41 =====

about  the next  state, the ASP   code   willfirstdefine  the game   parameters    through   facts
such  as the  following:

dice_value(1..6).
player(player1;player2).
cash(1..1000).
asset("B&O_Railroad").
penalty(50).

Then  rules  of the following  form  are used   to define actions  and   fluents.

action(sell_property(P,X))       :-player(P),   asset(X).
ﬂuent(asset_owned(P,V))         :-player(P),   asset(V).

Properties  of actions,  such  as  theirpre-conditions,   and  their effects  are defined  using
rules of the following  kind:

%Executability     of selling  assets
:-occurs(sell_property(P,V),       T), player(P),
asset(V),  time(T),   not  holds(asset_owned(P,V),T).

%Eect    of selling  assets
not_holds(asset_owned(P,V),T+1)
holds(asset_owned(P,V),T),
occurs(sell_property(P,V),T),
player(P),  asset(V),time(T).

not_holds(asset_mortgaged(P,V),T+1)             :-holds(asset_owned(P,V),T),
occurs(sell_property(P,V),       T),
player(P),  asset(V),   time(T).

holds(current_cash(P,X+Y),T+1)         :- holds(current_cash(P,X),T),
occurs(sell_property(P,V),T),
not holds(asset_mortgaged(P,V),T),
asset_price(V,Y),    player(P),   asset(V),   time(T).

not_holds(current_cash(P,X),T+1)          :- holds(current_cash(P,X),T),
occurs(sell_property(P,V),T),

===== PDF PAGE 42 =====

not holds(asset_mortgaged(P,V),T),
asset_price(V,Y),    player(P),   asset(V),   time(T).

holds(current_cash(P,X+Y),T+1)         :- holds(current_cash(P,X),T),
occurs(sell_property(P,V),T),
holds(asset_mortgaged(P,V),T),
asset_m_price(V,Y),      player(P),   asset(V),   time(T).

not_holds(current_cash(P,X),T+1)          :-holds(current_cash(P,X),T),
occurs(sell_property(P,V),T),
holds(asset_mortgaged(P,V),T),
asset_m_price(V,Y),      player(P),   asset(V),   time(T).

%Executability     of paying    jailﬁne
:-occurs(pay_jail_ﬁne(P),        T), player(P),   time(T),
not holds(in_jail(P),    T).

:-occurs(pay_jail_ﬁne(P),        T), player(P),   time(T),
not holds(current_cash(P,       _),  T).

:-occurs(pay_jail_ﬁne(P),        T), player(P),   time(T),
holds(current_cash(P,X),T),       X < 50.

%Eect    of paying    jailﬁne
not_holds(in_jail(P),     T+1)  :-holds(in_jail(P),    T),
occurs(pay_jail_ﬁne(P),        T),
player(P),  time(T).

not_holds(current_cash(P,        X),  T+1)  :-holds(current_cash(P,X),T),       holds(in_jail(P),
T),occurs(pay_jail_ﬁne(P),         T),player(P),   time(T).

holds(current_cash(P,       X-50),  T+1)  :-holds(current_cash(P,X),T),       holds(in_jail(P),
T),occurs(pay_jail_ﬁne(P),         T),player(P),   time(T).

The  inertia rules are expressed    as  follows:

holds(F,T+1)   :-

===== PDF PAGE 43 =====

ﬂuent(F),   holds(F,T),
not not_holds(F,T+1),      time(T).
not_holds(F,T+1)     :-ﬂuent(F),    not_holds(F,T),
not holds(F,T+1),    time(T).

The  initialstate is defined  using  holds  facts with  respect  to time point  0 such  as:

holds(in_jail(player1),     0).
holds(current_cash(player1,500),0).

An action  occurrence    at time point  0 is then  defined  as a  fact inthe  following  form.

occurs(pay_jail_ﬁne(player1),0).

Now  when   a  complete   ASP   program    with rules and  facts  of the above   kind is run, we
get an  answer   set from  which  we  can  determine    the state  of the world  at time  point 1.
Suppose    that the answer   set has  the  facts:

holds(in_jail(player1),     0).
occurs(pay_jail_ﬁne(player1),0).
holds(current_cash(player1,500),0).
holds(current_cash(player1,450),1).
while  our  next  observation     gives   us:
obs(current_cash(player1,477),1).

The  discrepancy   between    our  prediction  about  player1’s  current_cash    being  500  (at
time point  1) isdifferent from  our  observation   that player1’s   current_cash   is 477.  This
suggests   there is a novelty.  This  can be  determined    by the  following  two  simple  rules.

discrepancy(F,T)     :-ﬂuent(F),    time(T),
holds(F,T),  not  observed(F,T).
discrepancy(F,T)     :-ﬂuent(F),    time(T),
not holds(F,T),   observed(F,T).

While  the above   could  have  been   implemented     in any  language,   including  in the
simulator  language,   which   we  also implemented     in Python,  having   itin ASP,  makes   it
easier for us  to take the  next step,  which  is to find out what  the  novelty  is. In ASP,  we
have  to modify  the  above   ASP   code  by adding   the following  and  removing    “penalty(50)”
(referring to the jailfine in the Monopoly    game)   from  the  original code.

===== PDF PAGE 44 =====

oneto200(1..500).
1 {penalty(X)     :oneto200(X)}     1. %choice    rule
:-obs(current_cash(P,X),1),
holds(current_cash(P,Y),1),       X!=Y,  player(P).

Inthe  above,  the  firstfact and  the choice   rule defines  the  range  of penalty  that we  are
exploring.  Ifwe  had  just those  two  rules, we  would   get multiple  answer   sets  with a
penalty  ranging  from  1 to 500.  The   constraint  (the last ASP   rule) then  eliminates  all the
answer   sets where   the  observation   about  current_cash    does   not match   with  the holds.
Inthe  answer   set that remains,   we  get  the penalty  value   that would  make   the
observation   match   with the  holds, thus  allowing  us  to figure out  the novelty  with  respect
tothe  penalty.  In thisparticular  case,  the program    willhave   the answer   set  with
“penalty(23)"  thus  characterizing   the  novelty  that the penalty  is now   23.  The  agent  uses
a novelty  identification module    to characterize   the novelty.  This module    has  several
sub-modules    (which   can  be run  in parallel), each  focused   on  determining   a specific
novelty  type. We   add  two  modifications   that are used   for hypothetical   reasoning   about
the effect of an  action. The  firstmodification   allows  the  ASP   module   to replace
parameters    with constant   values  by  choice  values.  For  the second   modification,
constraints  are  added   to remove   answer   sets  where   the predicted   game   board   state
does  not match   the  observed   game    board  state. The   resulting answer    sets give  us the
parameter   values   which  reconcile  the  predicted  game    board  state  and  the observed
game   board  state.  Now   we  can  update  our  ASP   code  that  was  used  for hypothetical
reasoning   by simply   replacing  the earlier value   ofthe  parameter    with the new   value.
       We   illustrate the novelty  characterization   process   using  ASP    as follows.  For an
action whose    effects or preconditions    are changed    to cause   a novelty,  todetect  the
changed   preconditions,    ASP   rules can  be  written to enumerate    the  various  possible
preconditions,   and  then  constraints  would   be written  to pick the  right precondition,  and
similarly for effects. An  ASP   sample   code  snippet   (inClingo)  to discover   effects is as
follows:

not_holds(f,0).
0 { causes(a,f);   causes(a,neg(f))      } 1.
holds(F,  T+1)  :- occurs(A,T),   causes(A,F).
occurs(a,0).
:-not  holds(f,1).
#show    causes/2.

===== PDF PAGE 45 =====

Here  knowing   𝑓is not true at 0, and  observing   an occurred   at time step  0, and  𝑓is true at
time step  1,one  can  use  the above   code  to infer “𝑐𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑠(𝑎, 𝑓)”. An ASP   sample   code
snippet to discover   preconditions  is given  below.  Using  that, one  can  infer

“prec(a,neg(p))”.
0 { prec(a,p);  prec(a,neg(p))    } 1.
1{ holds(p,0)   ; not_holds(p,0)     }1.
fails(A,T) :-prec(A,F),   time(T),  ﬂuent(F),
not holds(F,T).
fails(A,T) :-prec(A,neg(F)),     time(T),  ﬂuent(F),
not not_holds(F,T).
:-not  holds(p,0).  %observed      that  p was  initially true
:-not  fails(a,0). %observed     that  a failed  in time  0
#show   prec/2.

The  ASP  enumerate,    and  test-based   modules   were  very  good  at detecting  small
changes;   they not only  detected  a novelty  but  often predicted  the exact  novelty,  e.g.,
some  novelties,  such  as  rent price change,   can  be easily detected   and  characterized.

5.2  Natural     language       author-attribution         domain
Novelty  detection  and  accommodation      inthe  natural language   domain   was   one  ofthe
domains   that we  had  proposed   in our original proposal.  In the  firstphase  of SAIL-ON    we
did not have  an  external  TA1  team  that would  generate   challenges   for our TA2   effort.
When   a TA1  team   developed   an  NL  challenge  on  “author  attribution” inPhase   2 of the
SAIL-ON   program,   we  were   the only TA2   team  that worked   on itbut  ceased   work  as the
TA1  team  dropped   out in Phase   3. Our  M30   results are shown   below:

===== PDF PAGE 46 =====

While  the PAR-UIC     team  did not  officiallycontinue   forthe  third phase.  However,    we
continued   working  with  them  informally  which   resulted  in the following  paper.

   1.  Neeraj   Varshney,   Himanshu     Gupta,  Eric  Robertson,   Bing  Liu and   Chitta Baral.  A
       Unified  Evaluation   Framework     for Novelty   Detection  and   Accommodation      in NLP
       with  an Instantiation  in Authorship   Attribution.  Findings  of ACL   2023.
       https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.05079.pdf

The  main  contribution   ofthis paper   was  a unified  evaluation   framework    forNovelty
Detection  and  Accommodation       in NLP.

===== PDF PAGE 47 =====

The  above   figure illustrates our multi-stage   pipelined  formulation   of NoveltyTask.    Initially,
examples    of a  set of K  labels  (‘known   labels’)  are provided   for training  a classification
system.  The   firstevaluation  stage  i.e. the ‘novelty  detection’  stage  consists  of evaluation
instances   from  the K  known    labels and   ‘N’ novel  labels. For  each   instance,  the  system
needs   to either  classify itto  one  of the K  known    classes  or  report it as novel  (not  from
any  of the K  known   classes)  i.e. the system   is evaluated   on  a (K + 1) class  classification
problem.   This  stage  is followed  by  a Feedback     phase   in which  the  ground   truth label of
the novel   instances   that the  system   correctly  reports  as  novel  is revealed.  The   system
then  needs    to  leverage   these   new    examples     (of the  novel   labels)  for  the  second
evaluation   stage  (novelty  accommodation)       in which   itis evaluated    on  a (K  + N)  class
classification problem.

5.2.1  Natural    Language      Domain      (independent       of an  external    TA1
evaluation):
Novelty  detection  and   accommodation      in the natural  language   domain    was  one  of the
domains   that we  had   proposed   in our  original proposal.  In the  firstphase   of SAIL-ON    we
did not have   an external  TA1   team  that would   generate   challenges    forour  TA2  effort.
Nevertheless,   we  worked    on iton  our  own  and  this led to the  following  papers:

   2.  Neeraj   Varshney,   Swaroop    Mishra,   Chitta Baral.  Investigating  Selective
       Prediction   Approaches     Across  Several   Tasks   inIID, OOD,    and  Adversarial
       Settings.  Findings   of ACL   2022.
       https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-acl.158.pdf

   3.  Neeraj   Varshney,   Swaroop    Mishra,   Chitta Baral.  Towards   Improving    Selective
       Prediction   Ability of NLP  Systems.    ACL   2022  RepL4NLP      Workshop.
       https://arxiv.org/pdf/2008.09371.pdf
Without  external  evaluation   we  followed   the existing  terminology   used  in the  NLP
domain.   For example,    we  modeled    the notion  of “novelty  detection”  in terms  of
“selective prediction”.  The  idea  behind   isthat  when   a novelty  isdetected   the  model
being  not sure  of itsability to predict accurately   would   decline  to predict; thus  the term
“selective prediction”.  We   studied  this in the above   two  papers   with respect  to 17
datasets  across   multiple  NLP  tasks  such   as Natural  Language     Inference  (NLI),
Duplicate  Detection,   and  QA  tasks  and   under  In-Domain    (IID),Out-Of-Domain     (OOD),
and  Adversarial   (ADV)  settings.

We  then  studied  novelty  accommodation       intwo  ways.   Initiallywe  studied  OOD
generalization   methods   in NLI,  Question   Answering    and  Image   Classification   tasks in
the following  paper.

===== PDF PAGE 48 =====

   4.  Tejas  Gokhale,   Swaroop    Mishra,  Man   Luo,  Bhavdeep    Singh   Sachdeva,    Chitta
       Baral.  Generalized   but  not Robust?   Understanding     the Effects  of Out-of-Domain
       Generalization    Methods.   Findings   ofACL   2022.
       https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-acl.213.pdf

We  then  explored  novelty  accommodation,      which  we   referred to as  “Post-Abstention”,
that allows re-attempting   the  abstained   instances  with  the aim  of increasing  coverage    of
the system   without  significantly sacrificing itsaccuracy.   We   provided  a mathematical
formulation  of this task and  then  explored   several  methods   to solve  it.Comprehensive
experiments   on  11 QA   datasets  showed    that these  methods    lead to considerable    risk
improvements–performance        metric  of the Post-Abstention    task–  both  in the in-domain
and  the out-of-domain    settings. Our  paper  on  this isaccepted    inACL   2023.

   5.  Neeraj   Varshney   and  Chitta  Baral. Post-Abstention:    Towards   Reliably
       Re-Attempting     the Abstained   Instances   in QA.  ACL   2023.
       https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.01812.pdf

5.2.2 Vision-language       domain     (independent       of an  external    TA1   evaluation):
We  also  worked   on developing   robust  methods    in various  vision-language    tasks. These
methods   are  useful in novelty  accommodation.      Following  are  two  papers  of ours  on this.

   6.  Tejas  Gokhale,   Abhishek    Chaudhary,   Pratyay   Banerjee,   Chitta Baral,  Yezhou
       Yang.   Semantically   Distributed  Robust   Optimization   for Vision-and-Language
       Inference.   Findings  of ACL   2022.

   7.  Tejas  Gokhale,   Rushil  Anirudh,  Bhavya    Kailkhura,  Jayaraman     J.Thiagarajan,
       Chitta  Baral  and  Yezhou   Yang.  Attribute-Guided    Adversarial  Training  for
       Robustness     to Natural  Perturbations.  AAAI   2021.

===== PDF PAGE 49 =====

6.  Hybrid        planning         reinforcement              learning         for   novelty
accommodation

We  developed    several novel  algorithms   that would  allow  us to handle  novelties  we
could not  easily detect  or characterize  based   on a  novel hybrid  planning
reinforcement   learning  (RL) framework,    initiallytheSPOTTER      algorithms   and  latera
specialization  and  refinement  with  the RapiLearn   algorithms,   and  also the biplex
planning  framework.    The  idea  isthat the planner   should  plan for discoveries   and  ifit
does  not have  any  operators   that apply in a world  changed    by the introduction  of a
novelty, itneeds   tomake   a discovery   to find out what  has  changed.    As described   in
Section  2, we  had  developed   an  elaborate  framework    forhandling   unexpected
changes   and  events  that includes  characterizing   them  and  recovering   from  them.
But sometimes    itwas  not  possible  to determine   how  to get past  an impasse,   in which
case  the hybrid  framework   resorted  to different types  of RL  algorithms  to detect
possible  actions that could  lead  again  to plannable  states  from  which  the planner
could find a path  to the goal  state. In particular, when   facing a prohibitive  novelty  that
results inthe  failureof execution   of known   actions, the  agent  can  stilluse itsdomain
knowledge   as  well as any  observations   itmade    about  the failure toformulate   an RL
problem  on-the-fly  and  tryto reach  a state  from  which  itcan  recover.  We   extended
the framework   from  a tabular  representation   to rich and  continuous   sub-symbolic
spaces  that require  function  approximation   to learn  successful  policies.  To evaluate
the proposed   methods,   we  developed    NovelGridWorlds,     a 2D  environment   designed
tomimic   the Polycraft  environment   that our  agent  was  tested  on throughout   the
program.  The   NovelGridWorlds     environment   contains   versions  of alltasks  used  in the
evaluation  but italso  features simpler  crafting  and  navigation  problems.

6.1  The    NovelGridWorlds            environment        for  benchmarking
novelty-aware         agents

We  developed    “NovelGridworlds”,   an  OpenAI   Gym
environment   framework    for developing   and  evaluating
AI agents  that can  detect  and adapt   tounknown    sudden
novelties in their environments.   The   environment   was
designed   tomimic   the Polycraft  domain   at the
gridworld-level  representation   of the domain,   an
example   visualization  ofa simple   2D  world is seen  on
the figure to the right.The  environment    was   originally
designed   so that we  can  perform  internal evaluation   of
our across  a wide-spectrum     ofnovelties.  The
environment   also  provides  an  interface for specifying  a variety of tasks  in addition to the
main  task  used  in the Polycraft  environment,   allowing  us  totest our  agent  on crafting

===== PDF PAGE 50 =====

tasks that  are simpler   as well as  more   complex   compared     to the original  pogo  stick
crafting domain.
       The   environment    affords  an  easy  to use  interface  for implementing    novelties
according   to the custom-designed      hierarchy   shown   to the  right.This  interface  allows  the
user to specify  novelties   that affect objects,  actions,  and  their attributes. For  example,
one  of the novelties  consists   of a novel  action  called  “jump”,  allowing  the agent   to move
faster and  hop  over  obstacles.   Another   action  novelty  is that of action  remapping,    where
the control  outputs  of the  agent  are  “scrambled”   to call different actions   as compared     to
the pre-novelty   scenarios.   A novelty  may   affect actions,  objects,  and  attributes  at the
same   time  – e.g., the “ax  to break”  novelty  is implemented     as a novel  action,  performed
with a novel  object,  resulting  ina  novel  affordance.
       The   environment    also  affords  multiple  types  of sub-symbolic    representation    of the
world  which  are  often used   by the  research   community     forevaluating
reinforcement-learning     algorithms.   These   representations    include  image-based
top-down   views   of the world  for use  by  CNNs,   as  well local-view,  LiDAR-like
representations    which  mimic   a physical  robot’s  partial observation    of the world.  The
environment    was  used   for evaluating   our RaPID-learn     framework    and  algorithm   for
knowledge-guided      RL,  where   an agent   formulates   an  RL  problem   on-the-fly  when   it
faces  a novelty  that breaks   down   itssolution  based   on  the pre-novelty   domain
knowledge,    shown   in the figure  below.














InSeptember     of 2022,   the environment    was   cloned  into  NovelGridWorld     2.0 and
extended   as  follows:

   1.  The   2.0 version   supports   multiple-agents   that  include  a competitor   crafting  agent
       as  well as  agents   that can  be  used  to trade  items  with.
   2.  The   new  environment     supports   the notion  of partial-observability   at the symbolic
       level; it can  include  multiple  rooms   as well  as objects  (e.g., a “safe”)  that may
       contain   items  that are  unseen   until interacted  with.

===== PDF PAGE 51 =====

   3.  The   2.0 version  also  provides  a  code-free  interface  for specifying  certain  classes
       of novelties,  in  addition  tothe  code-based    interface  which   requires  the user  to
       specify  the  novelty  inPython   code.

Some   example    worlds  generated    with NovelGridWorlds      2.0 are seen   below:















The  environment    willbe  submitted   as  a paper  to the 2024   AAAI   Conference.


6.2  The    hybrid     planning      reinforcement-learning              framework

When   prohibitive  or obstructive  novelties  are  attributed  tooperator   failure, the agent
needs  to discover   new  operators   that may   allow  itto solve the  task.

Precondition   discovery.  The  firststrategy  to discover   new  operators   involves
precondition   exploration.  For  a given  failed operator  𝑜 ∈   O  with  preconditions   𝜓𝑜  ,a
new  operator   𝑜′is constructed   with the  same   effects and  executor   as  𝑜 but with  a new
set of preconditions.   The  new   preconditions   𝜓𝑜′ are  constructed   using  a priority-based
order of all possible  preconditions   encountered     inO.  The  preconditions    are added   to 𝜓𝑜′
one  by one,  and  goals  are  submitted   to
the GOAL    MANAGER       to satisfy them   and  attempt  the  new  operator   𝑜′. Ifthe operator
succeeds,   the broken   operator   𝑜 isreplaced   with  thisnew   operator  𝑜𝑖 and  added   to 𝐾𝐵.

Operator   variations. Ifthe  precondition   discovery   failsto produce   a working   operator,
the agent  actively  searches   for known   operators   with unknown     effects. This process   is
guided  by  the agent’s  type  hierarchy  and  has  two  phases.   In the firstphase,   the agent
attempts  (compatible)   operators   with  the same   parameters    as  the failed one,  and  in the
second   phase,  prioritizes operators   that act on  different parameters    of the  same   type as
the failed operator.  Ifany  operator   produces   unexpected    effects,  a new  operator   𝑜′is
added   to𝐾𝐵,  and  the  agent  re-plans.   For instance,   consider  a scenario   where   traders
are no  longer  available  to interact. In this scenario,  when   the interact  operator  fails.The

===== PDF PAGE 52 =====

agent  may   attempt  to interact  with the  pogoist  as  itbelongs   to the same   type  as  the
traders. If both precondition    discovery   and  operator   variations  failto produce   an
operator  that enables   a  successful   plan, then  the  agent  attempts   to learn  a new
executor  for the  failed operator   using  knowledge-guided      reinforcement    learning.
       Due   to the  exponentially   large  search  space   of precondition   discovery   and
operator  variations,  the  agent  cannot   exhaustively   search   that space.   After expending
some   effort inthose   directions  to no avail, a  more  intelligent search   strategy  is
employed    to create  a new   executor   for the failed operator.  That  way,   the agent  can
discover  ways   to achieve   a desired   effect that would   assist itin solving  the  task. The
executor  learning   component     employs   RL  with  a reward   function  encoding    the failed
operator’s  desired   effects. A new   operator   isthen  created   with preconditions    derived
from  the state  description  where   the  failure occurred   and  effects identical  to the failed
operator.  The  learned   policy is used  as  the new   operator’s   executor,  and   the agent  can
use  itto reach  a state  from  which  itcan  plan  and  complete    the task.  The  proposed
algorithm  called  RAPid-learn    uses  knowledge-guided       exploration   informed   by the
novelty. The   component    receives   symbolic   state  descriptions   𝑠 ∈  S and   novelty
descriptions   from  the  goal  manager    and  temporarily   guides  the  agent’s  behavior   to
explore  the environment.



















The  procedure    forlearning   a new   executor  is described   in Algorithm   2.

Knowledge-guided      exploration   of novelties.  An  important   feature  of the executor   learner
isits knowledge-guided      exploration   strategy.  Using  a description   of novelties   ,the
exploration  strategy   ofthe  RL  learner  is biased  towards   states  and  actions   that are
related to the  novelty.  For instance,   ifthe presence    of a novel  object  is detected   in the
environment,    the RL  learner  may   be  encouraged     to explore  actions  on  that object.  The
knowledge-guided      exploration

===== PDF PAGE 53 =====

improves   the efficiency  of exploration  and  makes    the plan  recovery   process  easier.
Once  a  new  policy  𝜋𝜇𝑜  forthe  executor  𝜒𝑜  islearned,   the resulting  operator  is stored  in
the 𝐾𝐵.  The  parameters    of the policy  𝜇 are stored  in  and  retrieved  when   𝜒𝑜 isexecuted.
7.  Multi-player            novelty        detection          and      accommodation

For multi-player  novelty  detection,   characterization   and  accommodation      we  used
Monopoly    as the main   task which   isa  multi-player  adversarial  board   game   with up  to
four players.  For the  SAIL-ON    program   evaluation,   agents  were   tested  with one  novelty
injected per  trial,where  each   trialis100  games    of Monopoly.   The   novelty  could  be
added   inany  one  of the  100  games   and  persists  for the remaining   games.    The  novelty
could be  changing   the  number   of properties   ina  set required  for Monopoly,    the rent of a
property  after building  a hotel on  it,the order  of properties  on  the board  and   such.  The
set of possible  novelties  is not shared   with us  by the evaluation/test   team,  and  so  itis
leftto us to make   the  agent  as robust  and  adaptable    to novelties  as possible.
       We   developed    the novelty  accommodation      component     as  a policy controlled  by  a
state-value  function.  The  value  of a state is primarily  determined   by  the expected    short
and  long term  reward   obtained   from  that state.  Typically, approaches    that use  a  value
function for game-playing     agents  – like Monte   Carlo  Tree  Search   – either  simulate
trajectories to the end  and   backpropagate     the terminal  state value  to compute    the
starting state’s value,  or they  use a  limited lookahead    with an  evaluation  function  that
captures  the  value  of the rest of the trajectory. We   use  the simplest   form  ofthe
limited-lookahead    approach   where   we  just lookahead    by one-step   and  then  evaluate   the
next state  by approximating    the  expected   short  and  long term  returns  that would   result
by taking  the action.  The  reason   for planning   with a one-step   lookahead    was  that in the
game   of Monopoly,   a single  rollof the  die,or  a chance   card, or  an adversary’s   decision
could change    the entire value  of a  state. So  tocompute    the  value  of a state accurately
with simulated   actions,  requires  considering   a very  large set of branches    from  an
extremely   wide  and  deep  tree  that includes  many   possible  combinations     of dice rolls,
combination   of player  decisions,  auction   bids, and  more.  It should  be  noted  that each
turn of a player  also includes   what  are called  out-of-turn  moves   by  other players,  which
further increases   the branching   factor  of the search  tree.
       If one  had  a very  accurate  mental   model   of adversaries,   the possible  branches    of
the search  tree  might  become    more   manageable.    Additionally,  pre-training  a large
neural  network  for state  evaluation  is not viable  since  our agent  would   have  to handle
novelties  or modifications   to the game   (the space   of which  we   did not know).   Lastly, the
evaluators  impose   a  max  time  limitof 3 hours   per full-game,  so  simulating  enough
MCTS    rollouts for each  action  did not seem   feasible.  Rather  than  requiring  an  accurate
and  complete   model   to rollout and  evaluate  each   state, we  consider   long-term
consequences     with simplifying  assumptions     (to be described   below).   The  state value
includes  the current  monetary    value  of possessions,   potential  short  and  long term  gains,
as well as  the future  benefit of monopolized     properties.  Importantly,  the evaluation
function is largely parameterized     with game    attributes (that can  change)   and  has  few
tuned  constants;  this helps  make   itrobust  to game    variations. We   willfirstgo  over  the

===== PDF PAGE 54 =====

evaluation  function.  We   willthen  provide  some    examples    of the state attributes  that are
tracked  and  updated   in V(s)  to accommodate      for novelty.
       The   value  of a state should   consider   the current  (monetary)    value  ofowned
properties  as  well as the  potential for future  earning  as  possible  future  rewards.   Thus,
the evaluation   function  we  propose   is a linear combination    of four terms   i.e.,V(s) =
Massets   +  Rs  +  Rl  +  Mmonopoly.     Each   of these  terms  is described   below:

Massets:   Property   value  of allthe agent’s   assets  that are  not currently  mortgaged.    Each
property  can  be  mortgaged    with the  bank  for cash.  We   can  buy  back  the  property  from
the bank  for the  mortgaged    amount    plus interest  on the  mortgage.

Rs: short  term  expected   gain  in funds  computed    as  the difference   between   expected
rent the agent   willget for the  properties  that itowns   in state s and  the  expected   rent  it
would  owe   to other players   based   on current  ownership    of properties  over  the  next k
turns. The  expectations    are computed     over the  probabilities  of each  player  landing  in a
particular position  in the next  k turns. This  is akin to a rollout with  the strong  relaxation
(assumption)    that no more   properties   willbe  bought  or  developed.   To  be specific,  letG
be the  set of allagents,   g1 be  our agent,   P(g) denote   the  properties  owned    by agent   g,
r(p) denote  the  rent of property   p,and   P r(g, p, k) denote   the probability  that an  agent  g
willland  on a  property  p in the kthturn  from  state s, then  Rs  is
                               ⎡                                                       ⎤
computed    as Rs  =∑     ∑    ⎢ ∑   𝑃𝑟(𝑔,  𝑝,𝑘) *  𝑟(𝑝) −    ∑   𝑃𝑟(𝑔1,   𝑝,𝑘) * 𝑟(𝑝)⎥
                      𝑘 𝑔∈𝐺−𝑔  ⎢𝑝∈𝑃                         𝑝∈𝑃(𝑔)                     ⎥
                              1⎣   𝑔1                                                  ⎦

Rl:the  expected   long  term  change   in funds.  The   computation    forthis term  is similar to
Rs, except   that the probability  of an  agent  landing  on  a property   isassumed     to be
uniform  over  allproperties.   Note  that the long  term  gain  is calculated  for k full
loops/passes    around   the board   (not turns). The  value  of k for both  Rs  and  Rl was   taken
as 5.

Mmonopoly:     A monopoly    gain  term  is computed    to incorporate   the monetary    benefit  our
agent  would  get  for monopolizing    and  improving   all properties  of the  same   color. The
purpose   of this term  isto drive  our agent   towards   taking actions  that  would  let itgain  a
monopoly    on a  color and  subsequently    perform   maximal    improvements     on  itsproper-
ties.To  compute   Mmonopoly,     we   startby  calculating  the  expected   funds,  F, our  agent
would  have   after going  around   the board   (fullloop) k times  ( k =  5  inour
implementation)    from  itscurrent  position  as  F =  cash   possessed    +  k ∗ go  increment   +
Rl where   the last term  Rl is also computed     for k loops  around   the board.  Now   let C(g1)
be the  set of allcolors  such  that our  agent  owns   at least one   property  of that color. Then
foreach   c ∈  C(g1),  we  compute    the  combined    potential  rent for that color (Rc)  that our
agent  willget  from  allthe properties   of that color  ifitspends   allof F  inbuying   allthe
properties  of color c followed   by im-  proving  each   ofthe  properties  as  much   as  possible
with the remaining    amount   from  F. This  potential  rent value  is then  scaled  down   based
on how   many   properties  the  agent  actually  possess   (currently)  for that color. For

===== PDF PAGE 55 =====

example,   ifwe  own  1  out of 3 blue  properties,  then the  potential value  from  that color
should  be  much   less than  ifwe  own  2  out of 3 red properties.  The   scaled  potential  value
Rsc is computed    as Rsc  =  Rc  /2P(c)−P(g1 )where  P(c)  is the total number   of properties  of
color c.We   use  an  exponential   function in the  denominator    to value  color sets  that are
closer to completion   significantly  more  than  others.  Since  the set  size can  change   as
part of game   novelties,  we  think this isprudent.   Finally,the  monopoly    component    of the
state evaluation,  Mmonopoly,     is simply  computed    as the  maximum     Rsc over  allthe  c ∈
C(g1).  What  this monopoly    term  does   forthe  agent  isto allow  itto eschew    buying  new
or bidding  forproper-   tiesifthat amount    can  be used   to complete   and  develop   a
monopoly.
       Another   complication   for the agent   isthat itmust   tryto avoid  bankruptcy    inthe
face of a lot of stochasticity  from the  game.   So  even  ifthe expected    value  of a policy is
high, ifitrisks bankruptcy   then  a lesser-value   policy  that minimizes   the risk of
bankruptcy   might  be  preferred.  Concretely,  at any  state  s,the  agent  considers   ifeach
possible  move   from  the set of possible   moves   m  ∈  M  with cost  C(m)  satisfies  the
following conditions:

Condition  1: cashcurrent   +  Rnext   − C(m)  ≥  cashmin   where  cashcurrent   is the current
amount   of money   our  agent  possess,   Rnext   isthe  expected   change   in cash  due  to rent
afterone   round,  cashmin   denotes   the absolute  minimum     amount   needed    toprotect
against  bankruptcy.   This covers   misfortunes   from  the Chance    and  Community     chest
cards  that the agent  might  draw.

Condition  2: cashcurrent   +  Rowed    +  worthscaled    − C(m)   − Rworst   >  0 where   Rowed
isthe expected    income   from  charging   rent that our agent   willget in the next  round,
worthscaled   is some   mortgage    value  of allproperties  our  agent  owns,   and  Rworst  is the
maximum     possible  rent our  agent  could  be charged   in the  next round.  This  protects
against  bankruptcy   from  landing  on  an adversary’s   property.  Both  the  above  conditions
were  used  to prevent   the agent  from  aggressively   spending    itscash  and  going
bankrupt.  Once   we  have  pruned   the  moves   in M, our  agent  simply  chooses    the move
such  that m  =  arg maxm    V  (s′m) where   s′m is the next  state after simulating  the  move
m.

7.1  Novelty      Detection      and    adaptation
To perform   well in the SAIL-ON    evaluation,  our  agent  needs   to detect  the novelties
introduced  and  adapt   state evaluation   accordingly.  The  novelties  that the  agent  was
tested on  were  hidden.   To adapt,  we  maintain   knowledge    of the expected   values   for
game-board    attributes  likeproperty   rent, dice out- come   likelihood,  etc. The  evaluation
function is parameterized    with  such  attributes and  is updated   once   a change   is
detected.  Some   of these  values   are provided   directly as the  state information   and  thus
we  keep  track of the  current values   of these  attributes by  observing   the state. For  other
at-tributes, the  agent  needs   to observe   the outcome    of certain actions  (like selling a
property)  to inferhow   the relevant  at- tributes changed.    In attribute value  changes,   we

===== PDF PAGE 56 =====

also detect  novelties  related  to dice.  This includes   addition/deletion   of a die, additional
sides added    to the dice, and   the distribution  ofrolling any  number    on  each  die. The   first
two are  inferred  by observing    the dice  rollsin the game.    For the  last one,  we  model   the
distribution of rolling any  number    as Dirichlet  distribution and  use  MAP    estimates   to
update  this distribution.  This updated    dice distribution  is then used   to compute    the
probability function  Pr,  as used   to compute    Rs.

As mentioned,    accommodation
used  a 2-stage   rollout based
controller for efficient online  action
selection. It involved  a (a)
model-based     controller to account
fornovelty   and  (b) a
parameterized    simulator   module
updated   at runtime  with  detected
novelties

Stage  - 1 rollout: In the stage-1
roll-outwe   rolled out the  original
problem,   but kept  itshort  toavoid
high branching    factor

Stage  -2 rollout: In the stage-2
rolloutwe   rolled out a  relaxed
domain   (such  as  just going
through  the  board,  and  only
paying  and  collecting  rents, but
not indulging  in any  other
activities)which   had  a low
computational    cost and   allowed
forlong  horizon   value
computation.   Some    of the
strategies  for problem   relaxations   that we  experimented     with are  domain   independent
and  could  be used   in other  domains   are:  limiting adversarial  actions,  and   removing
stochasticity  from  the stochastic   dynamics.

7.2  Evaluation        and    Results
Our  agent  was   evaluated   against  other  teams   in the SAIL-ON     program   by  the USC   TA1
team.  Evaluation   consists  of multiple  trails,where   each   trialconsists  of 100   games   of
monopoly    against  3 baseline   agents.  The   baseline  adversarial   agents   were
programmed     by  the evaluation   team   to serve  as  the competition   baseline.   The  behavior

===== PDF PAGE 57 =====

ofthe  baseline  agent   isdescribed   in (Haliem   et al.2021)   as the  ”simple  baseline  agent”
inthat work.  During   each  trial,a novelty  is injected  during  one  of the 100  games,    and
kept for the remaining    games.
       The   following  metrics  help  compare   agent   performance:    (1) Pre-Novelty
Win-Percentage     (PNWP):    The  ratio of games    won  before   any  added   novelty. (2) Novelty
Detection  Accuracy    (NDA):   This is the percentage    of trialsin which   the novelty  was
correctly detected,   and  without  a false positive  before  the  novelty  was  added.   (3)
Novelty  Reaction   Performance     (NRP):   To compute    this, the win  ratioof our  agent  after
the novelty  was  added   is divided  by  the win  ratioof the  baseline  agent   before  the
novelty  was  added.   These   measures    were  not  defined  by  us, but by  the evaluation
group,  and  directed  by discussions    inthe  SAIL-ON    pro-  gram.  For  every  measure,   our
agent  was  evaluated   with  different classes  of novelties,  these  are:  Class  Novelties  (CN)
such  as new   classes  of objects  like property  classes,   or new  classes   of actions;
Attribute Novelties   (AN)  such  as changes    in the mortgage    rate, rent costs;  and
Representation    Novelties   (RN)  such  as  changes   to the  position of properties,  and   the
color sets to which   they  belonged.   Within  each  type  of novelty,  the evaluators   further
classified them   into easy, medium    and   hard. As  mentioned,    we  do  not have  more   de-
tailsabout  the  specific type  and  distribution of novelties  that our  agent  was   evaluated
on, as this information   is currently hidden   from  us to evaluate   agent  adaptation   better.
       The   results shown   in the  table below   compare    our performance     and  the
performance    of the best  competitor   for
NDA   and  Win  percentages    for the
different novelty  settings. With  respect
tothe  win ratio of our  agent,  our pre-
novelty  win ratio (PNWR)     was  76.48%,
i.e.the 3 other  base-  line agents
combined    only won   less than  a quarter
ofthe  games   when   there  was   no
novelty  injected. This  win rate
represents   the efficacy  of our agent
design/playing   algorithm   forthe
standard  Monopoly     game.   In
comparison    the win  rate for the next
best team   was  63.61%.    Our  agent
performs   better before  novelty  was
added   tothe  game,   and  also  inmost
set- tings after novelty  was  added   to the  game.   The  only  setting in which  our  agent  did
not get the  best result  was  for ”NRP-   CN-hard”   (Novelty   Reaction   performance    for hard
class- novelties).  This reflects  our agent’s  ability to accurately  capture   both  the short
and  long-term  effects  of actions,  as well as,  how  well itcan  adjust  for novelties  in the
game   while  making   decisions  by  modifying   the evaluation   function  during  the gameplay.
The  evaluators   also ran  a special  test to see  how  well our  agent  performs   against
another  instance   of our agent,  and  a baseline   agent.  The  two  instances   of our agent
won  40.75  and  39.43%    of the games    on  average   (over  many   trials).

===== PDF PAGE 58 =====

8.  Evaluations

Below  is the novelty  hierarchy  as itwas  used  eventually  for evaluations:


















Here  we  only show   the finalevaluation  results from  M42   evaluations  for both  the
Polycraft and  the Monopoly    domains   compared    to the other  teams  that participated  in
those domains.

























As can  be seen,  our  agent  achieved   orexceeded    allmeasures    in the Polycraft  domain
and achieved   or came   close  toall measures    inthe Monopoly    domain   (and  note that

===== PDF PAGE 59 =====

these  evaluations  are  only performed    on the  Phase   3 novelties).  Moreover,   in Polycraft
our agent  had  the best  performance    in every  measure    except  for CDT   (where  SIFT   was
better). We   also had  the biggest  improvements     in performance    gains  of allteams   from
the M36   tothe  M42  evaluations.




























We  were  also  the only  team  that performed   a  separate  evaluation   on the  visual novelty
detection  subtask  in Polycraft:

===== PDF PAGE 60 =====

9.   Publications

Feeney,  P., Schneider,   S., Lymperopoulos,     P., Liu, L.,Scheutz,   M., and  Hughes,    M.C  (2023).
"NovelCraft:  A  Dataset  for Novelty  Detection   and  Discovery   in Open   Worlds".   Transactions   on
Machine   Learning   Research.

Feeney,  Patrick,  and  Michael   C. Hughes    (201). "Evaluating   the Use   of Reconstruction    Error for
Novelty  Localization."  ICML   2021  Workshop     on Uncertainty   &  Robustness    in Deep   Learning.

Gizzi, E., Guaman,    M., Lin, W.,  Sinapov,  J. (2021).  "A  Framework    for Creative  Problem    Solving
Through   Action  Discovery".   In Proceedings    of RSS   2021  Workshop     on Declarative   and
Neurosymbolic    Representations     in Robot   Learning  and  Control.

Gizzi, E., Hassan,   A., Lin, W., Rhea,   K., and  Sinapov,   J.(2021).  "Toward   Creative   Problem
Solving  Agents:  Action  Discovery   through   Behavior   Babbling."  In proceedings    of the IEEE
International  Conference    on Development     and  Learning   (ICDL),  Beijing,  China,  August   23-26.

Gizzi, E., Nair, L.,Chernova,    S., and  Sinapov,   J.(2022).  "Creative   Problem   Solving  in Artificially
IntelligentAgents:   A Survey   and  Framework".     Journal  of ArtificialIntelligence  Research   75.

Goel, S., Shukla,   Y.,Sarathy,   V.,Scheutz,   M., and  Sinapov,   J. (2022).  "RAPid-Learn:    A
Framework    for Learning   to Recover   for Handling   Novelties  in Open-World     Environments".    In
Proceedings    of International  Conference    on Development     and   Learning  (ICDL).

Goel, S., Tatiya,  G., Scheutz,   M., and  Sinapov,   J.,(2021).  "NovelGridworlds:     A Benchmark
Environment    for Detecting  and  Adapting   to Novelties   inOpen    Worlds."  In proceedings    of the
2021  AAMAS     Workshop    on  Adaptive   Learning   Agents  (ALA).

Gokhale,   T.,Anirudh,   R., Kailkhura,  B., Thiagarajan,   J.J.,Baral,  C. and  Yang,   Y. (2021).
"Attribute-Guided   Adversarial   Training  for Robustness    to Natural  Perturbations".   In Proceedings
ofAAAI.

Gokhale,   T.,Banerjee,   P., Baral, C. and  Yang   Y. (2020).  "MUTANT:     A Training  Paradigm    for
Out-of-Distribution  Generalization    in Visual Question   Answering".    EMNLP     2020.

Gokhale,   T.,Chaudhary,    A., Banerjee,   P.,Baral,  C. and  Yang,   Y. (2022). "Semantically
Distributed  Robust   Optimization   for Vision-and-Language      Inference".  Findings   of ACL  2022.

Gokhale,   T.,Mishra,  S., Luo,  M., Sachdeva,    B.S.,  and  Baral, C.  (2022).  "Generalized   but  not
Robust?   Understanding     the Effects  ofOut-of-Domain     Generalization    Methods".   Findings   of ACL
2022.

Gopalakrishnan,    S., Soni,  U., Thai, T., Lymperopoulos,     P.,Scheutz,   M.,  and  Kambhampati,     S.
(2021). "Integrating  Planning,   Execution   and  Monitoring   in the presence    ofOpen    World

===== PDF PAGE 61 =====

Novelties:  Case  Study   of an Open   World   Monopoly    Solver." In 31st  International  Conference    on
Automated    Planning   and  Scheduling.

Guan,  L., Verma,   M., Guo,  S., Zhang,   R., and  Kambhampati,      S. (2021).  "Widening   the  Pipeline
inHuman-Guided       Reinforcement    Learning   with Explanation   and   Context-Aware    Data
Augmentation."    Advances    in Neural  Information   Processing   Systems    34.

Han,  X., Chen,  X., &  Liu,L.-P. (2021).  "GAN   Ensemble     forAnomaly    Detection".   Proceedings    of
the AAAI  Conference     on ArtificialIntelligence,  35(5), 4090-4097.

Han,  X., Chen,  X., and  Liu, L. (2021).  "Gan  ensemble    for anomaly    detection." Proceedings     of
the AAAI  Conference     on ArtificialIntelligence.  Vol. 35. No.  5.

Lorang,  P., Goel, S., Zips,  P.,Sinapov,   J.,and  Scheutz,   M.  (2022).  "Speeding-up    Continual
Learning  through   Information  Gains   in Novel  Experiences".    In Proceedings    of 5th Workshop    on
Bridging  the Gap   Between   AI  Planning  and  Reinforcement     Learning   (PRL)  at International  Joint
Conference    ofArtificialIntelligence  (IJCAI),  2022.

Lymperopoulos,     P.,Li, Y.,and  Liu, L. (2022).  "Exploiting  Variable  Correlation  with  Masked
Modeling   forAnomaly    Detection   in Time  Series."  NeurIPS   2022   Workshop    on  Robustness    in
Sequence    Modeling.

Mishra,  S., Khashabi,   D., Baral, C., and  Hajishirzi, H.  (2022).  "Cross-Task   Generalization    via
Natural  Language    Crowdsourcing     Instructions". Proceedings     ofACL.

Mishra,  S., Mitra, A., Varshney,   N., Sachdeva,    NS,  Clark, P., Baral, C., and  Kalyan,   A. (2022).
"NumGLUE:     A  Suite of Fundamental     yet Challenging    Mathematical    Reasoning    Tasks".
Proceedings    of ACL.

Muhammad,      F.,Sarathy,  V., Tatiya, G., Gyawali,   S., Goel,  S., Guaman,    M., Sinapov,   J. and
Scheutz,  M.  (2021).  "A Novelty-Centric    Agent  Architecture   forChanging    Worlds".   In
proceedings   of the  2021  ACM    Conference    on Autonomous     Agents   and  Multi-Agent   Systems
(AAMAS)

Pal, K., and  Baral, C. (2021).  "Investigating   Numeracy    Learning   Ability ofa  Text-to-Text  Transfer
Model".  Findings  of EMNLP.

Sarathy,  V.,Kasenberg,    D., Goel,  S., Sinapov,   J.and   Scheutz,  M.  (2021).  "SPOTTER:
Extending   Symbolic   Planning   Operators   through   Targeted  Reinforcement     Learning".  In
Proceedings    of the 20th  International  Conference    on Autonomous      Agents  and  MultiAgent
Systems   (pp. 1118-1126).

===== PDF PAGE 62 =====

Shukla,  Y.,Thierauf   C., Hosseini   R., Tatiya G., and  Sinapov   J. (2022).  "ACuTE:    Automatic
Curriculum   Transfer  from  Simple   to Complex    Environments".     In Proceedings    of International
Conference    on Autonomous      Agents  and   Multiagent  Systems    (AAMAS).

Sreedharan,    S.,Soni,  U., Verma,   M., Srivastava,   S. and  Kambhampati,      S. (2022).  "Bridging  the
Gap:  Providing  Post-Hoc    Symbolic   Explanations    for Sequential   Decision-Making     Problems   with
Inscrutable  Representations."    Proceedings    of the  10th  International  Conference    on Learning
Representations.

Thai, T.,Shen,   M., Varshney,   N., Gopalakrishnan,     S., Soni,  U., Scheutz,   M., Baral, C.  and
Sinapov,  J. (2022).  "An  Architecture  for Novelty   Handling   ina Multi-Agent   Stochastic
Environment:    Case  Study   inOpen-World     Monopoly."    AAAI   Spring  Symposium.

Thai, T.,Soni,  U., Verma,   M.,  Gopalakrishnan,    S., Shen,   M., Garg,  M.,  Kalani, A., Vaidya,  N.,
Kambhampati,     S., Varshney,   N., Baral,  C., Sinapov,  J., and  Scheutz,   M. (2023).  "Methods    and
Mechanisms     for Interactive Novelty   Handling   inAdversarial   Environments".     Extended   abstract,
Proceedings    of AAMAS.

Varshney,   N. and  Baral, C.  (2023).  "Post-Abstention:    Towards   Reliably  Re-Attempting    the
Abstained   Instances   inQA".   Proceedings    of ACL  2023.

Varshney,   N., Banerjee,  P., Gokhale,   T., and  Baral, C.  (2022).  "Unsupervised    Natural  Language
Inference  Using  PHL   Triplet Generation".   Findings   of ACL.

Varshney,   N., Gupta,  H., Robertson,    E., Liu,B.  and  Baral, C.  (2023).  "A Unified  Evaluation
Framework    for Novelty  Detection   and  Accommodation       inNLP   with an  Instantiation  in Authorship
Attribution". Findings  of ACL.

Varshney,   N., Mishra,  S., and  Baral, C.  (2022).  "Investigating  Selective  Prediction   Approaches
Across  Several   Tasks  in IID, OOD,   and  Adversarial   Settings.  Findings  of ACL.

Varshney,   N., Mishra,  S., and  Baral, C.  (2022).  "Towards   Improving   Selective  Prediction   Ability
ofNLP   Systems".    Proceedings    of ACL  2022   RepL4NLP     Workshop.